May 19, 2015

Exemption No. 11617
Regulatory Docket No. FAA–2015–0549

Mr. Clayton Barrows
Founder
Aerial Precision Survey
10662 West First Court
Star, ID 83669
Dear Mr. Barrows:
This letter is to inform you that we have granted your request for exemption. It transmits our
decision, explains its basis, and gives you the conditions and limitations of the exemption,
including the date it ends.
By letter dated February 16, 2015, you petitioned the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
on behalf of Aerial Precision Survey (hereinafter petitioner or operator) for an exemption.
The exemption would allow the petitioner to operate an unmanned aircraft system (UAS) to
conduct precision photogrammetry and crop scouting.
See Appendix A for the petition submitted to the FAA describing the proposed operations and
the regulations that the petitioner seeks an exemption.
The FAA has determined that good cause exists for not publishing a summary of the petition
in the Federal Register because the requested exemption would not set a precedent, and any
delay in acting on this petition would be detrimental to the petitioner.
Airworthiness Certification
The UAS proposed by the petitioner are the 3D Robotics Inc. Aero−M and 3D Robotics X8+.

2
The petitioner requested relief from 14 CFR part 21, Certification procedures for products
and parts, Subpart H—Airworthiness Certificates. In accordance with the statutory criteria
provided in Section 333 of Public Law 112−95 in reference to 49 U.S.C. § 44704, and in
consideration of the size, weight, speed, and limited operating area associated with the
aircraft and its operation, the Secretary of Transportation has determined that this aircraft
meets the conditions of Section 333. Therefore, the FAA finds that the requested relief from
14 CFR part 21, Certification procedures for products and parts, Subpart H—Airworthiness
Certificates, and any associated noise certification and testing requirements of part 36, is
not necessary.
The Basis for Our Decision
You have requested to use a UAS for aerial data collection. The FAA has issued grants of
exemption in circumstances similar in all material respects to those presented in your petition.
In Grants of Exemption Nos. 11062 to Astraeus Aerial (see Docket No. FAA−2014−0352),
11109 to Clayco, Inc. (see Docket No. FAA−2014−0507), 11112 to VDOS Global, LLC (see
Docket No. FAA−2014−0382), and 11213 to Aeryon Labs, Inc. (see Docket No.
FAA−2014−0642), the FAA found that the enhanced safety achieved using an unmanned
aircraft (UA) with the specifications described by the petitioner and carrying no passengers or
crew, rather than a manned aircraft of significantly greater proportions, carrying crew in
addition to flammable fuel, gives the FAA good cause to find that the UAS operation enabled
by this exemption is in the public interest.
Having reviewed your reasons for requesting an exemption, I find that—




They are similar in all material respects to relief previously requested in Grant of
Exemption Nos. 11062, 11109, 11112, and 11213;
The reasons stated by the FAA for granting Exemption Nos. 11062, 11109, 11112, and
11213 also apply to the situation you present; and
A grant of exemption is in the public interest.

Our Decision
In consideration of the foregoing, I find that a grant of exemption is in the public interest.
Therefore, pursuant to the authority contained in 49 U.S.C. 106(f), 40113, and 44701,
delegated to me by the Administrator, Aerial Precision Survey is granted an exemption from
14 CFR §§ 61.23(a) and (c), 61.101(e)(4) and (5), 61.113(a), 61.315(a), 91.7(a), 91.119(c),
91.121, 91.151(a)(1), 91.405(a), 91.407(a)(1), 91.409(a)(1) and (2), and 91.417(a) and (b), to
the extent necessary to allow the petitioner to operate a UAS to perform aerial data collection.
This exemption is subject to the conditions and limitations listed below.
Conditions and Limitations
In this grant of exemption, Aerial Precision Survey is hereafter referred to as the operator.

3
Failure to comply with any of the conditions and limitations of this grant of exemption will be
grounds for the immediate suspension or rescission of this exemption.
1. Operations authorized by this grant of exemption are limited to the 3D Robotics Inc.
Aero−M and 3D Robotics X8+ when weighing less than 55 pounds including payload.
Proposed operations of any other aircraft will require a new petition or a petition to
amend this exemption.
2. Operations for the purpose of closed-set motion picture and television filming are
not permitted.
3. The UA may not be operated at a speed exceeding 87 knots (100 miles per hour). The
exemption holder may use either groundspeed or calibrated airspeed to determine
compliance with the 87 knot speed restriction. In no case will the UA be operated at
airspeeds greater than the maximum UA operating airspeed recommended by the
aircraft manufacturer.
4. The UA must be operated at an altitude of no more than 400 feet above ground level
(AGL). Altitude must be reported in feet AGL.
5. The UA must be operated within visual line of sight (VLOS) of the PIC at all times.
This requires the PIC to be able to use human vision unaided by any device other than
corrective lenses, as specified on the PIC’s FAA-issued airman medical certificate or
U.S. driver’s license.
6. All operations must utilize a visual observer (VO). The UA must be operated within
the visual line of sight (VLOS) of the PIC and VO at all times. The VO may be used
to satisfy the VLOS requirement as long as the PIC always maintains VLOS
capability. The VO and PIC must be able to communicate verbally at all times;
electronic messaging or texting is not permitted during flight operations. The PIC
must be designated before the flight and cannot transfer his or her designation for the
duration of the flight. The PIC must ensure that the VO can perform the duties
required of the VO.
7. This exemption and all documents needed to operate the UAS and conduct its
operations in accordance with the conditions and limitations stated in this grant of
exemption, are hereinafter referred to as the operating documents. The operating
documents must be accessible during UAS operations and made available to the
Administrator upon request. If a discrepancy exists between the conditions and
limitations in this exemption and the procedures outlined in the operating documents,
the conditions and limitations herein take precedence and must be followed.
Otherwise, the operator must follow the procedures as outlined in its operating
documents. The operator may update or revise its operating documents. It is the

4
operator’s responsibility to track such revisions and present updated and revised
documents to the Administrator or any law enforcement official upon request. The
operator must also present updated and revised documents if it petitions for extension
or amendment to this grant of exemption. If the operator determines that any update
or revision would affect the basis upon which the FAA granted this exemption, then
the operator must petition for an amendment to its grant of exemption. The FAA’s
UAS Integration Office (AFS−80) may be contacted if questions arise regarding
updates or revisions to the operating documents.
8. Any UAS that has undergone maintenance or alterations that affect the UAS operation
or flight characteristics, e.g., replacement of a flight critical component, must undergo
a functional test flight prior to conducting further operations under this exemption.
Functional test flights may only be conducted by a PIC with a VO and must remain at
least 500 feet from other people. The functional test flight must be conducted in such
a manner so as to not pose an undue hazard to persons and property.
9. The operator is responsible for maintaining and inspecting the UAS to ensure that it is
in a condition for safe operation.
10. Prior to each flight, the PIC must conduct a pre-flight inspection and determine the
UAS is in a condition for safe flight. The pre-flight inspection must account for all
potential discrepancies, e.g., inoperable components, items, or equipment. If the
inspection reveals a condition that affects the safe operation of the UAS, the aircraft is
prohibited from operating until the necessary maintenance has been performed and the
UAS is found to be in a condition for safe flight.
11. The operator must follow the UAS manufacturer’s maintenance, overhaul,
replacement, inspection, and life limit requirements for the aircraft and
aircraft components.
12. Each UAS operated under this exemption must comply with all manufacturer
safety bulletins.
13. Under this grant of exemption, a PIC must hold either an airline transport,
commercial, private, recreational, or sport pilot certificate. The PIC must also hold a
current FAA airman medical certificate or a valid U.S. driver’s license issued by a
state, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, a territory, a possession, or the Federal
Government. The PIC must also meet the flight review requirements specified in
14 CFR § 61.56 in an aircraft in which the PIC is rated on his or her pilot certificate.
14. The operator may not permit any PIC to operate unless the PIC demonstrates the
ability to safely operate the UAS in a manner consistent with how the UAS will be
operated under this exemption, including evasive and emergency maneuvers and
maintaining appropriate distances from persons, vessels, vehicles and structures. PIC

5
qualification flight hours and currency must be logged in a manner consistent with
14 CFR § 61.51(b). Flights for the purposes of training the operator’s PICs and VOs
(training, proficiency, and experience-building) and determining the PIC’s ability to
safely operate the UAS in a manner consistent with how the UAS will be operated
under this exemption are permitted under the terms of this exemption. However,
training operations may only be conducted during dedicated training sessions. During
training, proficiency, and experience-building flights, all persons not essential for
flight operations are considered nonparticipants, and the PIC must operate the UA
with appropriate distance from nonparticipants in accordance with 14 CFR § 91.119.
15. UAS operations may not be conducted during night, as defined in 14 CFR § 1.1. All
operations must be conducted under visual meteorological conditions (VMC). Flights
under special visual flight rules (SVFR) are not authorized.
16. The UA may not operate within 5 nautical miles of an airport reference point (ARP) as
denoted in the current FAA Airport/Facility Directory (AFD) or for airports not
denoted with an ARP, the center of the airport symbol as denoted on the current
FAA-published aeronautical chart, unless a letter of agreement with that airport’s
management is obtained or otherwise permitted by a COA issued to the exemption
holder. The letter of agreement with the airport management must be made available
to the Administrator or any law enforcement official upon request.
17. The UA may not be operated less than 500 feet below or less than 2,000 feet
horizontally from a cloud or when visibility is less than 3 statute miles from the PIC.
18. If the UAS loses communications or loses its GPS signal, the UA must return to a
pre-determined location within the private or controlled-access property.
19. The PIC must abort the flight in the event of unpredicted obstacles or emergencies.
20. The PIC is prohibited from beginning a flight unless (considering wind and forecast
weather conditions) there is enough available power for the UA to conduct the
intended operation and to operate after that for at least 5 minutes or with the reserve
power recommended by the manufacturer if greater.
21. Air Traffic Organization (ATO) Certificate of Waiver or Authorization (COA). All
operations shall be conducted in accordance with an ATO-issued COA. The
exemption holder may apply for a new or amended COA if it intends to conduct
operations that cannot be conducted under the terms of the attached COA.
22. All aircraft operated in accordance with this exemption must be identified by serial
number, registered in accordance with 14 CFR part 47, and have identification
(N−Number) markings in accordance with 14 CFR part 45, Subpart C. Markings must
be as large as practicable.

6
23. Documents used by the operator to ensure the safe operation and flight of the UAS and
any documents required under 14 CFR §§ 91.9 and 91.203 must be available to the
PIC at the Ground Control Station of the UAS any time the aircraft is operating.
These documents must be made available to the Administrator or any law enforcement
official upon request.
24. The UA must remain clear and give way to all manned aviation operations and
activities at all times.
25. The UAS may not be operated by the PIC from any moving device or vehicle.
26. All Flight operations must be conducted at least 500 feet from all nonparticipating
persons, vessels, vehicles, and structures unless:
a. Barriers or structures are present that sufficiently protect nonparticipating persons
from the UA and/or debris in the event of an accident. The operator must ensure
that nonparticipating persons remain under such protection. If a situation arises
where nonparticipating persons leave such protection and are within 500 feet of
the UA, flight operations must cease immediately in a manner ensuring the safety
of nonparticipating persons; and
b. The owner/controller of any vessels, vehicles or structures has granted permission
for operating closer to those objects and the PIC has made a safety assessment of
the risk of operating closer to those objects and determined that it does not
present an undue hazard.
The PIC, VO, operator trainees or essential persons are not considered
nonparticipating persons under this exemption.
27. All operations shall be conducted over private or controlled-access property with
permission from the property owner/controller or authorized representative.
Permission from property owner/controller or authorized representative will be
obtained for each flight to be conducted.
28. Any incident, accident, or flight operation that transgresses the lateral or vertical
boundaries of the operational area as defined by the applicable COA must be reported
to the FAA's UAS Integration Office (AFS−80) within 24 hours. Accidents must be
reported to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) per instructions
contained on the NTSB Web site: www.ntsb.gov.
If this exemption permits operations for the purpose of closed-set motion picture and
television filming and production, the following additional conditions and limitations apply.
29. The operator must have a motion picture and television operations manual (MPTOM)
as documented in this grant of exemption.

7
30. At least 3 days before aerial filming, the operator of the UAS affected by this
exemption must submit a written Plan of Activities to the local Flight Standards
District Office (FSDO) with jurisdiction over the area of proposed filming. The 3-day
notification may be waived with the concurrence of the FSDO. The plan of activities
must include at least the following:
a. Dates and times for all flights;
b. Name and phone number of the operator for the UAS aerial filming conducted
under this grant of exemption;
c. Name and phone number of the person responsible for the on-scene operation of
the UAS;
d. Make, model, and serial or N−Number of UAS to be used;
e. Name and certificate number of UAS PICs involved in the aerial filming;
f. A statement that the operator has obtained permission from property owners
and/or local officials to conduct the filming production event; the list of those
who gave permission must be made available to the inspector upon request;
g. Signature of exemption holder or representative; and
h. A description of the flight activity, including maps or diagrams of any area, city,
town, county, and/or state over which filming will be conducted and the altitudes
essential to accomplish the operation.
31. Flight operations may be conducted closer than 500 feet from participating persons
consenting to be involved and necessary for the filming production, as specified in the
exemption holder’s MPTOM.
Unless otherwise specified in this grant of exemption, the UAS, the UAS PIC, and the UAS
operations must comply with all applicable parts of 14 CFR including, but not limited to,
parts 45, 47, 61, and 91.
This exemption terminates on May 31, 2017, unless sooner superseded or rescinded.
Sincerely,
/s/
John S. Duncan
Director, Flight Standards Service

., '

-.

.~

' .. i . '·

February 16, 2015
US Department of Transportation
Docket Management System
1200 New Jersey Ave., SE
Washington, DC 20590
Re: Exemption Request under Section 333 of the FAA Reform Act and Part 11 of the
Federal Aviation Reg,Ilations

Dear Sir or Madam:
Pursuant to Section 333 ofthe FAA Modernization and Refonn Act of2012 and the
requirements contained within 14 C.F.R. Pmi 11, Aerial Precision Survey requests an exemption
from Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs) detailed below for the 3D Robotics Inc. (3DR) AeroM and X8+ unmanned aircraft system.
The requested exemption would support an application for a commercial Certificate of
Authorization to support agriculture and land mm1agement. The 3DR Aero-M and X8+ systems
consists of a lightweight battery operated aircraft both weighing less than 7 pounds each, ground
based PC and handheld controller, and associated communications and imaging equipment. A
geo-referenced still camera is carried by the aircraft that allows it to conduct precision
photogrammetry and crop scouting at resolutions necessary for precision agriculture and land
management. The high-resolution data will provide farmers with detailed infonnation oftheir
crops allowing them to determine which m·eas may need more seeding, fertilizer, and water at a
faster rate than current conventional methods. Having the data at a faster rate will help fanners
maximize crop yields which will directly benefit the agricultural industry.
The unn1anned aircraft will be operated in the field with both a Pilot in Command (PIC) and a
ground-based Visual Observer (VO) in accordance with the FAA Policy N 8900.227 Section 14
"Operational Requirements for UAS" with the following additional operating restrictions:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

All operations will occur in Class G airspace at no more than 400ft AGL
Operations will be operated over private prope1iy with the pennission of the land owner
All required permits will be obtained from state and local governn1ent prior to operation
The aircraft will not be operated over urban or populated areas
The aircraft will not be operated within 5 NM of an airport or heliport
The aircraft will not be operated at air shows or over an open-air assembly of people
The aircraft will not be operated over heavily trafficked roads
Operations will be limited to day and visual meteorological conditions
Page 1 of8

9. Aircraft will remain within visual line of sight at no greater than Yz NM of the PIC at all
times
10. While the aircraft is airborne, the VO will be positioned within voice distance to the PIC
11. PIC will file a NOTAM providing radial/DME, radius, and a date/time group for each
operation
The PIC and VO will meet the requirements outlined in the FAA Policy N 8900.227 Section16
Personnel Qualifications. The PIC and VO will perform maintenance on the system along with
completing an in-service on maintenance and safety procedures as part of their initial training.
We do not anticipate the need for a supplemental pilot, due to the simplicity ofthe system.
We submit that the combination of strict operation under the guidelines established in 8900.227
and the aircraft's light weight, historically demonstrated flight perfonnance, and a fully qualified
flight crew, the FAA can have confidence that the operation will have an equivalent or greater
level of safety of a manned aircraft performing the same mission.
The name and contact infonnation of the applicant are:
Aerial Precision Survey
Attn: Clayton Barrows
Ph: 208-353-4402
Email: c lavton. barrmvs(~/i.aerial precisionsurvev .com
The regulations from which the exemption is requested are as follows:
14 CFR Part 21
14 CFR 91.203
14 CFR 45.23, 45.29
14 CFR 91.9
14 CFR 61.113(a) & (b), 61.133(a)
14 CFR 91.109, 91.119
14 CFR 91.121, 91.151
14 CFR Subpart E (91.401-91.417)
FAA Policy 8900.227 Paragraph 16(c)(4) and Paragraph 16(e)(l)
We are prepared to modify or amend any pmi of this request to satisfy the need for an equivalent
level of safety. We look forward to hearing from your office. Please contact us at any time.
Sincerely,

~~

Clayton Banows
Founder, Aerial Precision Survey
Page 2 ofS

Appendices:
A. Exemption Request and Equivalent Level of Safety
B. Safety Guidelines
C. Safety Log
D. Maintenance Procedures X8+
E. Maintenance Procedmes Aero-M
F. Flight Log
G. User Manual

Page 3 of8

Appendix A

EXEMPTION REQUESTS AND EQUIVALENT LEVEL OF SAFETY

Aerial Precision Survey requests an exemption from the following regulations as well as any
additional regulations that may technically apply to the operation of the 3D Robotics Inc. (3DR)
Aero-M and X8+
14 CFR Part 21, Subpart H: Airworthiness Certificates

This part establishes the procedures for the issuance of an airworthiness cetiificate. While the
FAA continues to work to develop airworthiness standards for UAS, we request an experimental
certificate be issued for the 3DR Aero-M and X8+ under either or both of the following
prOVlSlOnS:
21.191 Experimental certificates
Experimental certificates are issued for the following purposes:
(a) Research and development. Testing new aircraft design concepts, new aircraft
equipment, new aircraft installations, new aircraft operating teclmiques, or new uses
for aircraft.
(b) Showing compliance with regulations. Conducting flight tests and other operations
to show compliance with the airworthiness regulations including flights to show
compliance for issuance of type and supplemental type certificates, flights to
substantiate major design changes, and flights to show compliance with the function
and reliability requirements of the regulations.
Since the experimental cetiificate can be used for commercial purposes such as market surveys,
sales demonstrations, and customer crew training, we would expect that an experimental
certificate would permit for our commercial purpose as well.
The aircraft will not cany persons or propetiy, will not cany fuel, and will only fly under strict
operation requirements. Combined with the fact that the Aero-M weighs only 6.8 pounds and is
constructed primarily out of foam, and the X8+ weighs 5.6 pounds and is composed primarily of
aluminum and carbon fiber, we propose that the 3DR Aero-M and X8+ will be at least as safe, if
not safer, than a conventionally certificated aircraft performing the same mission.
If an experimental airworthiness ce1iificate is not appropriate for this application, then we
request an exemption of 14 CFR Pmi 21, Subpart H, and the requirement for an airwmihiness
cetiificate in general, citing the equivalent level of safety outlined in the previous paragraph.
14 CFR 91.203(a) & (b) Civil aircraft: Certifications required.

The regulation provides that an airworthiness certificate, with the registration number assigned to
the aircraft and a registration certificate must be aboard the aircraft. Additionally, subparagraph
(b) provides that the airworthiness certificate be "displayed at the cabin or cockpit entrance so
that it is legible to passengers or crew." At 6.8 m1d 5.6 pounds the 3DR Aero-M and X8+ are too
small to carry documentation, they do not have an entrance, and are not capable of carrying
passengers or a crew.
Page 4 of8

Appendix A

To obtain an equivalent level of safety and meet the intent of91.203, we propose that documents
deemed appropriate for this aircraft by the FAA will be located with the crew at the ground
control station and available for inspection upon request. In order to identify the aircraft, we
propose that the following information be pennanently affixed to the aircraft via placard:
Manufacturer: 3D Robotics Inc.
Model: Aero-M or X8+
Serial Number:
Registered to:
Aerial Precision Survey
10662 W First Court
Star, ID 83669
If found please contact: (208) 353-4402
14 CFR 45.23 Display of marks; general and 45.29 Size of marks.

These regulations provide that each aircraft must display "N" and the aircraft's registration
number in letters at least 3 inches high. Additionally, the aircraft must display the word
"EXPERIMENTAL" in letters at least 2 inches high near the entrance to the cabin, cockpit, or
pilot station. The 6.8 and 5.6 pound 3DR Aero-M and X8+ do not have an entrance in which the
word "EXPERIMENTAL" can be placed, and may not have a registration number assigned to it
by the FAA.
We propose to achieve an equivalent level of safety by including the word "EXPERIMENTAL"
on the top of the aircraft, where the PIC, VO and others in the vicinity of the aircraft while it is
preparing for launch will be able to see the designation. We feel that the permanent placard
discussed in the previous paragraph will provide the aircraft's registration infonnation should it
be found on the ground. We will also display at the ground station a high contrast flag or banner
that contains the words "Unmanned Aircraft Ground Station" in letters 3 inches high or greater.
Since the aircraft will operate within Yz NM of the ground station, the ba1111er should be visible to
anyone that observes the aircraft and chooses to investigate its point of origin.
14 CFR 91.9 Civil aircraft flight manual, marking, and placard requirements.

This regulation provides that no person may operate an aircraft unless a current, approved flight
manual is in the aircraft. We assume that the intent of this requirement is to ensure that flight
manual information is available to the aircrew while operating the aircraft. We request an
exemption to this requirement since the aircraft is not only too small to cany documentation, the
documentation would not be available to the crew.
To obtain an equivalent level of safety and meet the intent of91.9, we propose that a current
approved Airplane Flight User Manual (appendix G) must be available to the flight crew at the
ground station anytime the aircraft in in or operating for flight.
Page 5 of8

Appendix A

14 CFR 61.113 Private pilot privileges and limitations: Pilot in Command and 61.133
Commercial pilot privileges and limitations.

Section 61.113(a) states that "no person who holds a private pilot certificate may act as a pilot in
command of an aircraft that is canying passengers or property for compensation or hire; nor may
that person, for compensation or hire, act as pilot in command of an aircraft."
Section 61.113(b) states that "A private pilot may, for compensation or hire, act as pilot in
conm1and of an aircraft in connection with any business or employment if: (1) The flight is only
incidental to that business or employment; and (2) The aircraft does not carry passengers or
property for compensation or hire."
Section 61.133(a) states that "(1) General. A person who holds a co111111ercial pilot certificate
may act as pilot in command of an aircraft - (i) Canying persons or property for compensation
or hire, provided the person is qualified in accordance with this part and with the applicable parts
of this chapter that apply to the operation; and (ii) For compensation or hire, provided the person
is qualified in accordance with this part and with the applicable parts of this chapter that apply to
the operation."
We request exemption from sections 61.113(a) and (b), and section 61.133(a) because our
proposed operations include commercial operations. Considering the size, weight and operating
characteristics of3DR Aero-M and X8+ in question, and considering that the operation ofthe
UAS is to be confined to an area over private prope1iy with controlled access, Aerial Precision
Survey requests an exemption from section 61.113(a) and (b) with the following conditions:
1. The Pilot in Command (PIC) of the UAS must hold at least a private pilot airman
certificate and a third-class ainnan medical certificate and:
2. UAS operation will additionally require a Visual Observer (VO) and the VO must have
acceptable vision such that they can maintain visual line of sight (VLOS) with the UAS
at all times
Additionally, both the 3DR Aero-M and X8+ are equipped with an onboard autopilot for
autonomous flight, capable of being (and required by the operating manual to be) monitored by a
Ground Control Station (GCS) at all times. The onboard autopilot will also ensure flight
operation is kept within the controlled airspace, including prohibiting operation above a defined
maximum altitude.
14 CFR 91.109 Flight instruction; Simulated instrument flight and certain flight tests

The regulation provides that "No person may operate a civil aircraft that is being used for flight
instruction unless that aircraft has fully functioning dual controls." The 3DR Aero-M and X8+
ground control stations are based on a ground based PC and hand-held controller that offers a
trainer plug for a second set of"controls", both the student and instructor can, and will, operate
the controls simultaneously. With both student and instructor having "hands-on" the controls
during flight, we feel that this meets the intent of 91.1 09 and provides an equivalent level of
safety.
Page 6 of8

Appendix A

14 CFR 91.119 Minimum safe altitudes: General
The regulation provides that over sparsely populated areas the aircraft cannot be operated closer
than 500 feet to any person, vessel, vehicle, or structure. Since the aircraft will be operating at a
maximum of 400 feet AGL, we cannot comply with this requirement.
To provide an equivalent level of safety we will only fly over private property with the
permission of the land owner. The land owner will be briefed of the expected route of flight and
the associated risks to persons and property on the ground. We maintain that due to the small size
of the 3DR Aero-M and X8+, the hazard to persons, vessels, vehicles, and structures is not
comparable to manned aircraft and should be considered in granting the exemption.
The aircraft will not be operated over congested areas nor over any open air assembly of persons.
The aircraft will be operated at an altitude allowing, if a power unit fails, an emergency landing
without undue hazard to persons or prope1iy on the surface.

14 CFR 91.121 Altimeter settings
The regulation provides that aircraft shall maintain cruising altitudes by reference to an altimeter
setting available within 100 nautical miles ofthe aircraft. The aircraft will fly below 400 feet
AGL and will not need to maintain hemispherical cruising altitudes in order to de-conflict with
other aircraft. An appropriate altimeter measurement presented to the pilot should be above
ground level and should be based on the barometric pressure at the point oflaunch. To provide
an equivalent level of safety, the UAS's AGL altimeter will be set to zero on the ground prior to
every flight. Since neither aircraft will t1y more than 40 minutes, even rapid changes in
barometric pressure will have limited e±Iect on the safety of the t1ight.

14 CFR 91.151 Fuel requirements for flight in VFR conditions
The regulation provides that no person may begin a flight in an airplane under day-VFR
conditions unless there is enough fuel to fly to the first point of intended landing and to fly after
that for at least 30 minutes. We feel that the intention ofthis paragraph is to provide a reserve of
energy as a safety butler for go-arounds and other delays to landing.
The 3DR Aero-M and X8+ are battery operated and the maximum duration of flight from a
single battery charge is 40 minutes for the Aero-M and 15 minutes for the X8+. Since the aircraft
will never fly more than Yz NM from the point of intended landing, a full battery charge at launch
will ensure that we meet the reserve energy requirement of this paragraph. We request an
exemption to the word "fuel" and ask for an equivalent interpretation with the word "energy".

14 CFR Subpart E (91.401-91.417)- Maintenance, Preventive Maintenance, and
Alterations
The regulation provides that the operator is primarily responsible for maintaining the aircraft in
an airworthy condition, including compliance with part 39 and 43. Paragraphs 91.407 and 91.409
require that the aircraft be "approved for return to service by a person authorized tmder 43.7"
Page 7of8

Appendix A

after maintenance and inspection. It is our intention that the PIC perform maintenance and
inspection of the aircrafts and "be authorized to approve the aircrafts for retum to service."
As provided in the attached Maintenance Procedures (appendices D & E), the PIC will ensure
that the aircraft is in an airwmihy condition prior to flight and conduct detailed inspections after
every 10 hours. Maintenance will perfonned and maintained by the PIC per the operating
manual, which contains instructions and procedures for inspecting, maintaining, and repairing
the UAS. The PIC will document work performed in accordance with 91.417. We feel that due to
the size, construction, and simplicity of the aircrafts, the PIC can ensure an equivalent level of
safety.
8900.227 Paragraph 16(c) (4) PIC Medical. And Paragraph 16(e) (1) Observer Medical.
This policy provides that both the PIC and VO must have a valid FAA second-class medical
cetiificate issued under part 67 in order to perform as a pilot or observer. The aircrafts weigh 6.8
and 5.6 pounds. Requiring the crew to meet the same medical requirements as a commercial pilot
canying passengers in a large aircraft is an mmecessary burden.
We propose that the minimum medical requirements be vision corrected to 20/20 and a valid,
state-issued driver's license. Due to the size and weight of the aircraft, the greatest hazard of our
proposed operation will be driving to the launch site. A licensed driver is medically qualified to
operate a much larger vehicle. The 20/20 vision requirement will ensure that the PIC and VO can
see and avoid air traffic. Given the unlikely event that both the PIC and VO become medically
incapacitated while the aircraft is in flight, the 3DR Aero-M and X8+ will recover autonomously
to the landing location designated prior to launch without crew intervention.

Page 8 of8

Appendix B

Safety Check Procedure

Safety check of aircraft performed prior to very flight.
Visual Inspection of Aircraft:
•
•
•
•
•

Check motor/engine and mounting attached to the airframe;
Study propellers I mounting hardware (tight) I rotor blades for chips and deformation;
Check the landing gear for damage and function
Look at complete airframe for any cracks or abnormalities
Wire connections tight and secure
Procedure for Failed Visual Inspection of Aircraft
PIC will log failure cause in detail and ground aircraft. Aircraft will not be put back into
service until PIC has rectified problem per manufacturer guidelines and
recommendations. If problem cannot be rectified, aircraft will be returned to
manufacturer for direct replacement.

Pre-arm Safety Checks which will prevent the vehicle from arming if any of a fairly large
number of issues are discovered before take-off including missed calibration, configuration or
bad sensor data. These checks help prevent crashes and fly-aways. The pilot will notice a preann check failure because he/she will be unable to arm the copter and the LED will be flashing
yellow.

Procedure for Pre-Arm Check Fail
Recognizing which Pre-Arm Check has failed using the GCS
1. Connect the Flight Controller to the ground station using a USB cable or Telemetry.
2. Ensure the GCS is connected to the vehicle (i.e. on Mission Planner and push the
"Connect" button on the upper right).
3. Turn on your radio transmitter and attempt to arm the vehicle (regular procedure using
throttle down, yaw right)
4. The first cause of the Pre-Arm Check failure will be displayed in red on the HUD
window
Log Failure cause in detail and ground vehicle until PIC has rectified cause per
manufacturer recommendation and guidelines. If cause cannot be rectified, aircraft will
be returned to manufacturer for direct replacement.
Page 1 of 4

Appendix B

Failure messages
RC failures (i.e. transmitter/receiver failures):

RC not calibrated : the radio calibration has not been performed. RC3 MIN and RC3 MAX
must have been changed from their default values (11 00 and 1900) and for channels 1 to 4, the
MIN must be less than 1300 and the MAX greater than 1700.
Barometer failures:

Baro not healthy : the barometer sensor is reporting that it is unhealthy which is nonnally a sign
of a hardware failure.
Alt disparity : the barometer altitude disagrees with the inertial navigation (i.e. Baro +
Accelerometer) altitude estimate by more than 2 meters. This message is normally shmt-lived
and can occur when the flight controller is first plugged in or if it receives a hard jolt (i.e.
dropped suddenly). If it does not clear the accelerometers may need to be calibrated or there
may be a barometer hardware issue.
Compass failures:

Compass not healthy : the compass sensor is reporting that it is unhealthy which is a sign of a
hardware failure.
Compass not calibrated: the compass(es) has not been calibrated. the COMPASS_OFS_X, Y,
Z parameters are zero or the number or type of compasses connected has been changed since the
last compass calibration was performed.
Compass offsets too high :the primary compass's offsets length (i.e. sqt1(x"2+y"'2+z"2)) are
larger than 500. This can be caused by metal objects being placed too close to the compass. If
only an internal compass is being used (not recommended), it may simply be the metal in the
board that is causing the large offsets and this may not actually be a problem in which case you
may wish to disable the compass check.
Check mag field: the sensed magnetic field in the area is 35% higher or lower than the
expected value. The expected length is 530 so it's> 874 or< 185. Magnetic field strength
varies around the world but these wide limits mean it's more likely the compass calibration has
not calculated good offsets and should be repeated.
Compasses inconsistent : the internal and external compasses are pointing in different directions
(off by >45 degrees). This is normally caused by the external compasses orientation (i.e.
COMPASS_ORIENT parameter) being set incorrectly.
Page 2 of 4

Appendix B

GPS related failures:
GPS Glitch : the GPS is glitching and the vehicle is in a flight mode that requires GPS (i.e.
Loiter, PosHold, etc) and/or the circular fence is enabled.
Need 3D Fix: the GPS does not have a 3D fix and the vehicle is in a flight mode that requires
the GPS and/or the circular fence is enabled.
Bad Velocity: the vehicle's velocity (according to inertial navigation system) is above
50cm/s. Issues that could lead to this include the vehicle actually moving or being dropped, bad
accelerometer calibration, GPS updating at below the expected 5hz.
High GPS HDOP: the GPS's HDOP value (a measure of the position accuracy) is above 2.0
and the vehicle is in a flight mode that requires GPS and/or the circular fence is enabled. This
may be resolved by simply waiting a few minutes, moving to a location with a better view ofthe
sky or checking sources of GPS interference (i.e. FPV equipment) are moved further from the
GPS. Alternatively the check can be relaxed by increasing the GPS_HDOP_GOOD parameter to
2.2 or 2.5. Worst case the pilot may disable the fence and take-off in a mode that does not
require the GPS (i.e. Stabilize, AltHold) and switch into Loiter after arming but this is not
recommended.
Note: the GPS HDOP can be readily viewed through the Mission Planner's Quick tab as shown
below.

INS checks (i.e. Acclerometer and Gyro checks):

INS not calibrated : some or all of the accelerometer's offsets are zero. The accelerometers
need to be calibrated.
Accels not healthy : one of the accelerometers is reporting it is not healthy which could be a
hardware issue. This can also occur immediately after a firmware update before the board has
been restarted.
Accels inconsistent : the accelerometers are reporting accelerations which are different by at
least lm/s/s. The accelerometers need to be re-calibrated or there is a hardware issue.
Page 3 of 4

Appendix B

Gyros not healthy : one of the gyroscopes is reporting it is unhealthy which is likely a hardware
issue. This can also occur ilmnediately after a firmware update before the board has been
restarted.
Gyro cal failed : the gyro calibration failed to capture offsets. This is most often caused by the
vehicle being moved during the gyro calibration (when red and blue lights are flashing) in which
case unplugging the battery and plugging it in again while being careful not to jostle the vehicle
will likely resolve the issue. Sensors hardware failures (i.e. spikes) can also cause this failure.
Gyros inconsistent : two gyroscopes are reporting vehicle rotation rates that differ by more than
20deg/sec. This is likely a hardware failure or caused by a bad gyro calibration.
Board Voltage checks:
Check Board Voltage: the board's internal voltage is below 4.3 Volts or above 5.8 Volts.
If powered through a USB cable (i.e. while on the bench) this can be caused by the desktop
computer being unable to provide sufficient current to the flight controller- try replacing the
USB cable.
If powered from a battery this is a serious problem and the power system (i.e. Power Module,
battery, etc) should be carefully checked before flying.
Parameter checks:
Ch7&Ch8 Opt cannot be same: Ch7 and Ch8 auxiliary switches are set to the same option
which is not permitted because it could lead to conu1sion.
Check FS_THR_VALUE :the radio failsafe pwm value has been set too close to the throttle
channels (i.e. ch3) minimum.
Check ANGLE_MAX: the ANGLE_MAX parameter which controls the vehicle's maximum
lean angle has been set below 10 degrees (i.e. 1000) or above 80 degrees (i.e. 8000).
ACRO _BAL _ROLL/PITCH : the ACRO_BAL _ROLL parameter is higher than the Stabilize
Roll P and/or ACRO _ BAL_PITCH parameter is higher than the Stabilize Pitch P value. This
could lead to the pilot being unable to control the lean angle in ACRO mode because the Aero
Trainer stabilization would overpower the pilot's input.

Page 4 of 4

Appendix C

Verify transmitter battery charged to 12.0 - 12.6 v
. Verify main battery charged to 16.5-16.8v
-

-

Check all surfaces for signs of damage, abnormalities,
and overall condition; Inspect each boom to ensure they
ar~_i.11_gg_Q_d_ str_u~_turalcond!_!!_Q!!_3J!ci prQP~rly_~~£_ured_~

Check motor and mounting attached to the airframe
.~

---------

·-~-~~------~-~--

-~----·--··---

-

Study propellers I mounting hardware (tight) I rotor
blades for chi.Q~ :.md deformation ···-· _
Check the landing gear for damage and function
Test electrical connections, plugged in and secure
-

- - - -----·-

----------- --

-

-·

i Ensure photo I video equipment mounting system is
secure and op_~~~a_tion,a. _,: :l_·------~Check location of GPS equipment controlling the
aut~_p!If:Jt

Check the IMU movements in the ground control
; software
--UA VI Drone is in a level location safe for takeoff
1

-~

1

,__ -

--

------

• AU transmitter controls move freely in all directions
-

-

----

-

All transmitter trims in neutral position
··--

-

-

. AU transmitter switches in correct position
·-.

Transmitter throttle to zero
Radio transmitter on
.

-------

Connect I power on battery to airframe
! Ensure led indicators and audible tones are correct

Timer on (if applicable)
i Scan for nearby cars I people I animals

Say "CLEAR!"
-·

, Arm flight controller
Increase throttle slightly listening for any abnormalities
Short 20-30 second hover at 3-5 feet (listen for vibrations
· I loose items)
•

If any fails marked, PIC will perform and log maintenance in separate maintenance log sheet

•

If any fails marked aircraft will be grounded until cleared by PIC

XS-M
Operati

Manu l

Thank you for purchasing an X8-M! This manual contains important information about your aerial
mapping platform. Please read these instructions before your first flight.

1 Plan

1

2 Fly

19

3 Process

30

Appendix

34

Parts

2

Flight Battery
Charging
Safety
Powering the X8

3
3
3
4

Camera Setup
3DR EAI
Charging
Starting a Mission
Mounting

5
5
5
5

Ground Station Setup
Download Software
Connect to Radio

7

6

7
7

Mission Planning
Operating Parameters
Load Maps
Draw Polygon
Configure Survey
Save and Write Mission

8
8
9
10
II
18

Parts

-

ground station radio

micro-USB cable

xs

~

batteries (2)

II
~

charger and
accessories

Android adapter cable

battery guard bag

I
RC controller and
accessories

Pixhawk micro-SO
card adapter

propeller wrench

SF propellers

SFP propellers

~1!~

,...".''"'.·-.·."'>'.1'.

registration card and
Pix4D license key

spare UV filter

spare mounting nut

FPV/OSD System
If you selected to receive a FPV/OSD system, those components
will be included with the XS's accessories. See page 27 for parts
and instructions.

2

Fli~ht

Battery

The X8 is powered by a rechargeable lithium polymer (LiPo) battery.
Charge the battery before your first flight.

Safety
2
Connect the charger to the power adapter cable
and a wall outlet. Connect the red cable to the +
port and the black cable to the - port.

Set the charger to LiPo and 3A.

0

0

1S

0

2S

0

35

Flying with a low battery is a safety risk and can render the
battery permanently unusable. Always fly with a fully charged
battery.

0

45

-~

Charge the battery using a designated LiPo balance charger
only. Always monitor the battery while charging. Protect the
battery from extreme heat, extreme cold, puncturing, and
flammable surfaces. Always transport, charge, and store the
battery in the guard bag.

0

LiPa

Charger with power cable and
split-wire charging cable

3A

Inspect the battery for damage before and after flying. If you
observe any swelling of the package or the battery ceases
to function, do not use the battery; locate your local battery
recycling center, and dispose of the battery. In the US and
Canada, visit call2recycle.org to find a location. Do not
dispose of the battery in the trash.

Charger settings

3

4

Connect the white connector to the 4S port, and
join the two yellow connectors together.

Secure the battery inside the guard bag,
and charge until the status indicator
displays green.

•

~!!!!!!!--

+--.

Charging

4S

Complete

Flight battery charging wiring

Charging in process

3

theX8

Turn on the controller. To avoid triggering
the controller's startup alarm, ensure that
all switches are set back (away from you)
and the throttle stick is set fully down.

Switches

2
Attach the battery to the underside of the
copter using the velcro straps, and join the
yellow connectors.

It is important to establish communication
before powering on the XS. Always turn
on the controller before connecting the
battery. When powering off the XS,
disconnect the battery before turning off
the controller.

Throttle stick

RC controller

4

Camera Setup
The XB includes a Canon PowerShot 8100 running the 3DR EAI script.

3DR

(Exposure-

erture-ISO)

3DR EAI runs on the Canon Hacker Development Kit (CHDK), a powerful opensource tool that expands the functionality of Canon point-and-shoot cameras. 3DR
EAI optimizes image exposure and integrates with the Pixhawk autopilot to enable
distance-based imaging.
This software is designed to load off the camera's SD card, leaving the original Canon
programming intact. The yellow switch on the side of the SD card allows you to lock
or unlock the card. Lock the SD card to run 3DR EAI; unlock the SD card to save
images to your ground station or to boot the camera with its original programming.

Charge the camera battery before your first flight. Once
fully charged, insert the battery into the camera.

+--- status indicator

For more information about 3DR EAI, see page 36.
Canon battery charger

1

a Mission

i

SO card locked
Load 3DR EAI

SO card unlocked
Load default Canon software

»

»
»

Fly a mapping mission

»

To prepare the camera to fly a mapping mission, ensure that the mode
dial is set to P (program) mode. Power on the camera using the silver
button on the top. 3DR EAI will start automatically, and you will see the
script messages on the camera display. Check to see that the last line
of the script reads waiting on USB signal. The camera is now ready to map!

View images on camera
Save images to ground station
Update script

.~

power button

DElU1lJtm:nSXZ68-lebrs.,:.1
B.r;o;>d!hl'.lP3.1

mode dial

~tb!-i!hittet'Mlallllpcm:e
!J,-:563 Sia&hs 18111 1\11) ts 2814
liJde.~.eooti~U~~SJF:B.Sc!rwjf"B
Tv.Uts MX!1132911 ... tn;1/64J ~ 8 8

aoc t,s

•

_llit;4.11•11ii11.35~·811,

lSliirlfJJmll:GISC2:Wlll
l'£-.dlo.3 Vl:ll!o'8U5B:2
<M,11<rt!2S'llS8lll!)BflJl.t

..

nlt.~oot!S!I:sl~1

~~

Camera running 3DR EAI

A

Camera running Canon software

Power off the camera before removing the SD card.
Camera ready to map: waiffng on USB signal

5

Mountin~
When the camera is ready to start the mission, open the latch, and insert the
camera into the mount. Close the latch, and rotate the mount so the camera
faces down. Connect the mini-USB cable to the camera.

The camera mount includes a cap to protect the UV filter during travel. Before you
fly, remove the cap, and check that the filter contains no dirt particles or scratches
that could affect image quality. If you notice any damage to the filter that could affect
image quality, screw off the filter and replace with the extra filter provided with the XS.

nl

v

~--

, l

·'

UV filter

I

Camera enclosure with cap

Camera enclosure with cap removed

mounting plate

latch
mini-USB cable

Connect mini-USB cable
here.

Camera (side)

6

Ground Station Setup
Mission Planner allows you to turn a Windows laptop into a full-featured
ground station for configuring and monitoring autonomous missions. You will
need to take this laptop into the field when you fly the mission. As part of the
mission procedure, you will use the Pix4D Rapid Check to verify the quality of
the image set before leaving the field.

Download

II

Mission Planner

Mission Planner is a full-featured ground station application for planning
missions and monitoring the X8 in flight. Download Mission Planner
from 3DR.comldownload_software.

To connect the X8 to Mission Planner, connect the ground station radio to
the laptop, and power the X8.

2
Connect the ground station radio to your
laptop using the micro-USB cable. Open
Mission Planner.

Select 57600 and AUTO, then select CONNECT.
(When connecting directly to Pixhawk's
micro-USB port, set the rate to 115200.)

If you already have Mission Planner installed, make sure you're running
the most recent version: Select the Help tab and Check for Updates.

Mission Planner

Connecttooi (top-right corner))

Ground station laptop with radio connected

3
Mission Planner: Help tab

Select Flight Data to view live data from the X8.

Pix4Dmapper LT 3DR Edition

Your license key for Pix4Dmapper can be found on the registration card
inside the documents package.
Visit mapper.pix4d.com/license-redeem to create an account and redeem
your license key; then visit pix4d.com/downloadto download Pix4Dmapper
Discovery. Pix4D will automatically upgrade from the Discovery edition to
the LT 3DR Edition (or Pro Edition if you selected to upgrade) when you
log in to the program with your Pix4D account information.

Mission Planner Right Data tab: connected to aircraft

7

Mission Plannin~
Operatin~

Parameters

The X8 is a complete solution for creating high-resolution
visual-spectrum aerial maps.

Operating Parameters

Canon 8100
Pixhawk
autopilot
system

~

[ 3DR EAI]

---+

Pix4Dmapper
LT 3DR Edition

To create a map, the X8 flies an autonomous mission over
the survey site, using the integration between the Pixhawk
autopilot and custom-programmed camera to capture
images at a consistent distance interval. Pix4Dmapper
then stitches these images together into a georeferenced,
orthorectified mosaic.
The accuracy of the map depends on the configuration of
the mission. Planning a mission that captures high-quality
images requires balancing the X8's operating parameters
with the environmental factors at the survey site.

Camera Orientation

Landscape (top facing forward)

Operating Altitude

50-120m

Default Altitude

60m

. Low~Wind Conditions

0-6 m/s

High-Wind Conditions

7-10 m/s

Maximum Wind Conditions

10. m/s

Operating Speed

1-17 m/s

Default Speed

5 m/s

Estimated Maximum Flight Time

14min

Estimated Ground Resolution

2 em/pixel

Estimated Maximum Survey Area

.1 km 2

Minimum Photo Interval

2 seconds

8

Load Maps
Mission Planner allows you to plan the mission away from the mapping location;
however, it is important to assess the environmental conditions on site at the time
of the mission and adjust the flight plan if necessary. Alternatively, you can plan
the entire mission at the mapping location. To create or alter the mission, Mission
Planner requires an Internet connection to access the maps. If you're unable to
access the Internet on site, follow the instructions below to pre-fetch the maps
within Mission Planner while you have Internet access.

2
Open Mission Planner, select Flight Plan, and
zoom to your flying location.

Right -click on the map, select Map Tool and
Prefetch, and accept the default prompts.
Mission Planner will download the maps
for the selected location to your computer.

Mission Planner Flight Plan tab: zoom to mapping location

Mission Planner Flight Plan tab: Select Prefetch

3
Mission Planner will attempt to load the map data from the current level of zoom down to the
closest level of zoom available. However, it can take hours to pre-fetch every level of zoom,
and it is unlikely that the closer levels will be useful in planning the mission. To shortcut this
process, check the slider on the right side of the map. The levels of zoom are represented by
this slider from 0 (bottom) to 25 (top). Press the ESC key to skip levels of zoom at a greater
detail than you need for mission planning.

9

Poly~on
To begin planning the mapping mission, select the area you want to map using
the Polygon tool. You'll be able to adjust the size and shape of the polygon later in
the mission configuration process.

Select Flight Plan, and zoom to your
mapping location.

2

3

Right click on the map. Select Draw Polygon and
Add Polygon Point. Click and drag to add points
around the area you want to map.

Right click on the polygon. Select Auto WP and
Survey (Grid) to open the Survey Tool.

FLIGHT PlAN
:-:.---~

mr

.

Mission Planner Flight Plan tab: zoom to mapping location

Mission Planner Flight Plan tab: draw polygon

A

Mission Planner Right Plan tab: open Survey tool

Units
The Survey Tool uses metric units. If your Mission Planner is
set to imperial units, please change the settings to use metric
to plan the mission. Support for imperial units in Mission
Planner is coming soon; check 3DR.com/XB-Mfor updates.

10

The Survey tool allows you to configure a mapping mission according to the X8's
operating parameters and the current environmental conditions at the mapping
location. First, set the default values for the X8.

Set Camera
Canon S1 OO-S120

Set Camera Orientation
Check the option for Camera top

facing forward.

Set Default Speed
5 m/s

Apply Survey Speed
Check the option for Use speed for this mission.
If unchecked, the mission will use the XB's
default speed of 5 m/s regardless of the speed
selected in the Survey Tool.
Mission Planner Survey tool

11

Next configure the angle of the flight path for the current wind conditions.

Set Angle
Wind Direction
In environments with winds of less than 6 m/s, set the angle so
that the X8 flies into the wind. In winds from 7-1 0 m/s, configure
the flight path to travel perpendicular to the wind so the X8 flies
cross-wind.
No. of Strips
Adjust the angle so that the X8 makes as few turns as possible to
complete its course. The No. of Strips parameter shows how many
passes the X8 will make as you adjust the angle.
Mission Planner Survey tool

Review Wind Conditions On-Site
Always assess the wind conditions at your survey site at the time
of the mission and adjust the mission accordingly.
Mission Planner Tip: Adjust Polygon
Click and drag the red polygon points to adjust the size
and shape of the polygon from the Survey Tool.

Angle in low winds (1-6 m/s)

Angle in high winds (7 -10 m/s)

Use caution when flying in winds over 1Om/s. Mapping results
may degrade as a result of inability to make headway or maintain
appropriate groundspeed.

12

The survey altitude determines the duration of the mission and the ground
resolution of the final map. Adjust altitude to balance flight time and power
consumption with the current environmental conditions.

Set Altitude
Recommended altitude: 60 m
Operating altitude: 50-1 00 m
Increasing altitude decreases flight time, allowing you to
cover more area per minute. Decreasing altitude improves
ground resolution. Set the altitude to get the best ground
resolution while keeping the flight time under 14 min and
the altitude under 120 m.

Keep altitude below 120 m, and ensure that the altitude is
appropriate for your flying area and local regulations.

Mission Planner Survey tool

Check Ground Resolution
Ground Resolution is the centimeters per pixel that
you will have in the map and corresponds to the
amount of detail that you will see.
To improve ground resolution by decreasing the
number of centimeters per pixel, decrease altitude.

Check Flight Time
Flight Time estimates the duration of the mission. The total
estimated flight time must be under 14 min f~:>r a fully
charged X8 battery. To decrease flight time, increase
altitude or speed.
High winds, humidity, high altitude, and extreme heat can
affect power consumption and reduce flight time. Consider
the environmental factors at your site when configuring
flight time.
In this example, we increased speed to 8 m/s to keep
flight time below 14 min while allowing for moderate wind
conditions. When increasing speed, keep in mind that the
increased power required to travel faster will impact flight
time.
13

With the basic parameters in place, verify that the photo interval calculated from
the altitude and speed complies with the operating parameters for the camera.

Mission Planner Survey tool

Check Photo Interval
Photo Every must be longer than 2 seconds for the S 100
camera.

Altitude
Increasing altitude increases photo interval.

Keep altitude below 120 m, and ensure that the altitude is
appropriate for your flying area and local regulations.

Speed
Decreasing speed increases photo interval.

Ensure that the Use speed for this mission option is checked.
14

Now select a takeoff and landing pattern, either manual or automatic.

Takeoff and Land WP's
For automatic takeoff and landing (recommended)
Check the Add Takeoff and Land WP's option.
Check the Use RTL option.
After initiating the mission, the X8 will automatically take off, climb to
the survey altitude, and begin the mission. At the end of the mission,
the X8 will automatically return to the launch point and land.
Mission Planner Survey tool

For manual takeoff and automatic landing
Uncheck the Add Takeoff and Land WP's option.
Check the Use RTL option.
Take off manually, and initiate the mission in flight. To end the
mission, the X8 will land automatically at the launch point.

15

Mission Planner: Survey Tool

Check Advanced Options
to view the Survey Tool's advanced configuration options.

Survey Tool: Grid Options (Advanced)

f

Select Grid Options
Adjust StartFrom
During the mission, you will maintain contact with the X8 through
the RC controller and ground station signals. If these signals are
lost during flight, the X8 will respond with the assigned failsafe
behaviors. See page 29. If your mission is likely to experience a
loss of signal, it is best practice to start from the corner of the
mission farthest from the launch point.

Adjust Overlap and Sidelap
Overlap and sidelap are set to 50% and 60%, respectively,
by default. See page 35 for an in-depth discussion of these
parameters.

~

__.J

Camera Config
The options under the Camera Config tab
allow you to configure a camera other than
the S1 00 and won't be used for operating
the X8.

16

Before accepting the survey, check that the mission complies with the XS's operating parameters. Once you
accept the survey, you will not be able to edit it directly by re-opening the Survey Tool. If you need to adjust the
survey, clear the mission (right click, select Clear Mission), and repeat the survey configuration process.

Operating Parameters
Camera
Canon S100-S120
Altitude
50-100m
Camera top facing forward
checked
Flying speed
1-17 m/s
Use speed for this mission
checked (optional if speed set to default speed of 5 m/s)
Photo Every
greater than 2 s
Flight time
under 14 min depending on environmental conditions

Accept
Select Accept to save the mission.
If Mission Planner prompts you for a home altitude, enter the
altitude that you specified in the Survey Tool.

Do not accept the mission if any of the parameters
exceed the XS's operating limits.
17

Save a

Mission

On the Flight Plan screen, save the waypoint file to your computer and write the mission to the X8.

Select Save WP File
to save the mission file to your computer. To
repeat this mapping mission, load the saved
WP file from your computer.

Select Write WPs
to save the mission to the X8.

18

Safety

20

Aircraft Operation
Components
Assembly
Controls
Modes
Preflight Checks
LED Indicators and Tones
GPS Lock
Arming and Disarming
FPV System Operation

21

21
22
23
24
25
25
25
26
27

Flying Mapping Missions
Takeoff Checklist
Initiating
Monitoring
Failsafes

28
28
28
29

28

19

Safety
To ensure safe and successful flying, familiarize yourself with the safety information
on this page. Always fly in accordance with your location regulations and these
best operating practices.

Propeller
Spinning propellers can cause serious injury. The
safety button indicates the status of the motors to
help you prevent hazardous contact with the X8's
high-speed propellers.

Before you fly, determine the boundaries of your safe flying area. If the X8 moves
outside the designated area or exhibits instability in flight, switch to altitude hold
mode and land the copter manually.

The X8 will not avoid obstacles on its own, including during missions. As the
operator, it's your job to recognize and avoid obstructions while flying. Always be
ready to regain manual control of the copter in the event of an unsafe situation.

.. ····

*

•...······ visual line
400ft
(120m)

of sight

Always fly below 400ft (120 m) and within your
visual line of sight. Don't let the X8 get too far
away from you; make sure you can always see
its orientation. Don't fly in low light, heavy wind,
rain, or other conditions that might impede
visibility.

When the X8 is powered on, the safety
button will blink red, indicating that the
motors are inactive and the propellers are
safe to handle.

•

When you're ready to fly, press and hold the
safety button until it shows solid red. This
indicates that the motors are active and the
propellers can spin if armed. To make the
propellers safe to handle again, press and
hold the safety button until it blinks red.

••••

Location

0

•

A

You can find more safety tips throughout these
instructions where you see this yellow box.

'

5 miles {8 km)

0
100ft(30m)

Always fly at least 5 miles (8 km) away from
airports and other areas where pilots operate
manned aircraft.

Always fly at least 100 feet (30 m) away from
people, vehicles, and buildings. Make the
safety of people and property your first priority!
20

Aircraft Operation

rear arms
Pixhawk autopilot

front arms
camera integration
cable
camera mount

safety button
status LED

21

The X8 arrives in travel configuration. Complete these steps to prepare the copter for flight.

Arms
Remove the bolt and nut outside each arm. Rotate the arm into position, insert the
bolt through the plates and the arm, and secure the arm in place with the nut.

•
flight position

travel position
Propellers
Remove the nuts and washers from the motors. Add SFP propellers and SF
propellers as marked below with the writing on the propellers facing towards
the sky. This will be a tight fit; apply pressure and twist the propeller onto the
shaft.
'Top motor: SF

Top motor: SFPt

Bottom motor: SF

Top motor:

•

,

Sl

Bottom motor: SFP' e

A

Place the washer over the propeller, and secure the
nut tightly on top using the propeller wrench.

• 'Bottom motor: SFP

~0

a

Top motor: SFP

e 'Bottom motor: SF

Ensure writing on all propellers faces the sky.
22

yaw left

Controls
Fly the X8 manually using the RC controller.

Rotate
counterclockwise.

yaw right

if~

Rotate
clockwise.

fl~

'''*-':-·
roll left
Throttle:

Yaw:

Move the left stick forward and backward to control altitude and
acceleration.

Fly to the left.

Move the left stick horizontally to rotate and control orientation.
Navigate by orienting the X8 with the blue arms facing forward.

Pitch:
Roll:

Move the right stick vertically to fly forward and backward.
Move the right stick horizontally to fly to the left and to the right.

roll right
Fly to the right.

,~-''"'\, li;"'t'"'''
{

\; jj_

[S:::D-

\,,,,~_,j \.,."'-cr""'.

throttle up
Increase speed and
altitude.

roll and pitch center

-~'
-.-·,

Automatically level.

,

.

--.,

,-~

••••••••••
throttle down
Decrease speed and
altitude.

throttle fully down

..

Fly forward.

pitch down

.
-~-.-·,.-,··

pitch up

..

~

Land.

Fly backward.

•••

23

Auto - fly a mission
Fly an autonomous mission. This is the mode that the X8 will use to create the map.

To select a flight mode:

First, set the GEAR/MIX switch to select a set of modes. Then use the
FLAP/GYRO switch to 0, 1, or 2 to select a specific mode.
Altitude hold - assisted manual control
Altitude hold mode provides manual control of roll, pitch, and yaw, while allowing the
autopilot to maintain the current altitude automatically. Set the left stick to center,
and the copter will automatically maintain the current altitude. Raise the throttle stick
above center to increase altitude (and to take off), and lower the throttle stick below
center to decrease altitude. Adjust altitude and orientation with the left stick, and
navigate with the right stick.

Loiter - hover
With automatic autopilot control of altitude, position, and orientation, loiter is the
easiest way to fly. Just release the sticks and the copter will hover in place.

With GEAR/MIX set to GEAR,
set FLAP/GYRO to:

0 for Stabilize
1 for Loiter
2 for Auto

With GEAR/MIX set to MIX,
set FLAP/GYRO to:

Return to launch (RTL) - recall and land
Activate RTL during the mission to end your flight automatically. RTL commands
the X8 to achieve a minimum altitude of 15 meters, return to the launch point, hover
for five seconds, and land. Use the right stick to adjust the position of the X8 during
landing. After landing, tile X8 will automatically disarm after a few seconds.

0 for Stabilize
1 for Altitude hold
2 for RTL

GEAR/MIX selects the set of modes.

Stabilize - full manual control
Stabilize allows full manual control of altitude, position, and orientation without
autopilot assistance.

FLAP/GYRO selects the specific mode,
either 0, 1, or 2.

RC controller (top)

24

Visual Check

Test Flight

Before flying, examine the X8 to verify the following:

Before flying the mission, fly a brief test flight to verify that the X8:

))

All propellers are tightly attached in the correct order with the writing
on each propeller facing the sky.

))

All propellers can spin without obstruction.

»

The antenna is oriented vertically.

Responds to controls correctly in stabilize mode.

»

Holds position in loiter mode.

»

Correctly executes a return-to-launch command.

Lock

LED lnd

••••
oeoe
oeoe
••••

))

Initializing, please wait
Acquiring GPS, please wait
Autopilot ready, GPS locked

Auto, RTL, and loiter modes requires GPS lock. When powered,
the autopilot will automatically search for GPS lock. If you plan to
use auto, RTL, or loiter modes during your flight, ensure that the
autopilot acquires GPS lock before takeoff, indicated by a blinking
green status LED.

Armed
Loss of RC signal, automatic landing
Low battery, automatic landing
Loss of GPS signal, automatic landing
System error, see troubleshooting guide

Visit 3DR.com/X8-M to listen to Pixhawk's status tones.

25

Armin~ and

D

Arming and disarming are important steps that must be completed before takeoff and after
landing. There are two steps to arming the X8: the safety button and the throttle stick.

The arming and disarming procedures ensure that you
can safety start and stop motors without risk of injury.

Before arming, check the status LED. Before you fly, wait for the autopilot to acquire GPS
lock. The LED will flash blue while the X8 acquires GPS; this can take a few minutes. Once
you see the flashing green LED, the autopilot has acquired GPS lock.

•• e e
0e0e
0

e0 e

The X8's motors will spin when armed! Make sure the
propellers are clear of any obstructions, including your
hands, before arming.
Do not handle the propellers or pick up the copter while
the safety button is
active (solid red) .

Initializing, please wait.
Autopilot ready, no GPS
Autopilot ready, GPS locked
Pre-arm check failure, see page 39.
Disarming

1
To disarm the motors, hold the left stick
down/left until the motors stop.

Arming

1
When you're ready to fly, place the copter at
a clear launch point, with the blue arms facing
away from you.

L-

~
·--

-.

-··--

2
Press and hold the safety button until it displays solid red.
This indicates that the X8 is now active. Stand back!

e0 eO
eee•

Motors inactive, safe to handle
Motors active, deactivate before handling

1-

2
3
To arm the motors, hold the left stick
down/right until the motors spin.

Press and hold the safety button until it blinks red.
The motors are now inactive, and the X8 is safe to
handle.

26

System Operation
If you selected to receive an optional FPV/OSD system, the components are pre-installed
into the XB to transmit on-board video.

2 Wire and power receiver

Parts
Transmitter
AV receiver

Attach an antenna to the receiver. Connect the AV output cable to either receiver AV OUT
port. Connect the RC power cable to the receiver DC IN port, and attach a battery to the red
connector.

Antenna
Receiver cables

Batteries (1 plus 1 spare)

3 Remove lens cap

1 Charge battery
Charge both batteries before your first flight. Set the charger to LiPo and 1A. Connect the
white battery connector to the 38 port, and connect the XT60-JST charger adapter to the
red battery connector and yellow
charger connector.

The video transmitter is powered by the main flight battery and will automatically
turn on when the XB is powered. To turn off the transmitter, disconnect the red
JST connector. Remove the lens cap from the camera before takeoff.

~

LiPo

Remove lens cap!

1A
4 Viewing video
When using a 3DR Black Pearl Monitor to view your video, set the mode to DJV (M button
changes modes), the channel to 8 (+ and - buttons), and the band to E (press the power
button to access the menu).

For more information about configuring the FPV/OSD system, visit 3DR.com/X8-M.

27

Flyin~

Mappine Missions

Before flying the mission, check the following:
))

For automatic takeoff, arm the XS in stabilize mode. Switch to auto mode, and
raise the throttle to initiate the mission.

Camera is on with mission script ready and is secured into the
mount with the mini-USB cable connected and the cap removed.

For manual takeoff, initiate the mission in flight by switching to auto mode.

,

XS is powered and connected to the ground station with all pre-flight
checks passed.

,

The survey mission has been adjusted to account for present
environmental conditions and saved to the XS.

Monitor the XS closely during the mission using your line of sight and the
Mission Planner Flight Data screen.

Actions

Status

Mission Planner Flight Data: Attitude

2

3
2

2

1 Change waypoints or restart a mission
2 Change modes
3 Change altitude
Flight Map

3

3
4

4
1
2
3
4

Heading direction
Bank angle
Altitude* (black) and rate of climb (blue bar)
Ground speed

1
2

5
6
1 Ground station signal* 4 Distance to current waypoint >
2 GPS time
3 Currently
enabled mode

current waypoint number
5 GPS status*
6 Battery status*
Full battery: 16.8 V
Low battery failsafe: 14 V

&

*Failsafe behavior enabled

3
4

End your flight at 14.1 V!

5
6
1 Current heading
2 [)irect pe1th to current w<typoint
3 GPS-reported direction of travel

4 Actu;1.1 flir;Jht path
5 Latitude, longitude
6 Altitude

28

-

•

- - . T , ; .. - -

--~

~-

-,-.,,,-,F•

-~,~-,~

Failsafes
The X8 is programmed with a set of failsafe behaviors to prevent a crash in the event of a loss
of one of the data or communication channels required for autonomous flight. Although certain
failsafes have assigned LED indicators and tones, it is unlikely that you will be able to see these at a
distance. Monitor the Flight Data screen for failsafe indications. If a failsafe is triggered, the assigned
behavior will activate. To override the failsafe behavior (RTL in most cases), use the controller to
regain manual control.

Regaining Manual Control
To regain manual control during the mission, switch to altitude hold mode using the controller. If
you're a confident operator, switch to stabilize mode for full manual control. If you observe instability
in the XS's flight behavior or it the aircraft moves outside your designated safe flying area, switch to
RTL. Turning off the controller will automatically trigger an RTL and can be used in an emergency
situation as a hard recall command.

Ground Station Signal Failsfe
Physical obstructions and interference from nearby wireless signals can affect the XS's connection
with the ground station. Use the Mission Planner Flight Data display to monitor the ground station
connection strength during flight.

Low Battery Failsafe
Environmental conditions can affect power consumption. Use the Mission Planner Flight Data
display to monitor the voltage of the battery during flight.
If the battery reaches 14 V, the X8 will land automatically at the current position, indicated by a
blinking yellow status LED and a quick repeating tone.

0000~

GPS Failsafe
Enclosed areas, physical obstructions, and lack of available satellites can affect GPS strength.
Use the Mission Planner Flight Data display to monitor the GPS during flight.
If the X8 loses GPS lock for over five seconds, it will land automatically at the current position.

If the X8 loses contact with the ground station for over five seconds, it will automatically return to
the launch point and land.

~-······-//······~
....

eoeff

RC Controller Signal Failsafe
Physical obstructions and interference from nearby wireless signals can affect the X8's connection with the RC controller.

<>

Altitude Failsafe
The X8 has a 120 m altitude geofence enabled by default. If the geofence is breached, the X8
will automatically RTL.

If the X8 loses contact with the RC controller, it will return to the launch point automatically and
land, indicated by a blinking yellow status LED.

t·

4Q(!ft

II·*

(1?Qm)

.J.
0000

29

3 Process
On-Site Quality Check
Spot Check
Download Images
Download Log File
Pix4D Rapid Check

31
31
31
32
33

Full Processing

33

30

On-Site Quality Check
Before leaving the suNey site, check the images using Pix4D to ensure
sufficient quality for mapping by downloading the images from the SD
card, downloading the log file from the X8, and completing Rapid Check
Initial Processing in Pix4D.
If you observe poor image quality or the quality report returns errors, see
the Image Quality Troubleshooting section on page 38 and repeat the
mission.

L)
quickest way to see
images after a flight is to unlock the SD
card and restart the camera. The camera will load the default Canon
programming and you can select the playback button to review the
images.

Unlock the SD card and
into your ground station. Select the DCIM
folder and locate the folder for your flight. Copy the files into a project
folder on the ground station and delete them from the SD card.

r0:"f ~~-~'::~i
i; ·•"-

,,.,~

l ;::..
!

Ju...,

l"'--

~~~;n•:•
;

playback button

!

,,,,."'
.I!<:U

jl:~=~~·

i' ,_

SD card file structure: Download images

31

Pix4D uses the GPS data from the X8's log file to georeference the images. To
download the X8's dataflash log, power the X8 and connect to Mission Planner.
The download process will be faster if you connect the micro-USB cable directly
to Pixhawk's micro-USB port instead of connecting using the ground station
radio. (When connecting directly to the X8, set the rate to 115200.)
On the Flight Plan screen, select the DataFiash Logs tab under the heads-up
display, and select Download DataFiash Log over Mavlink.
Mission Planner: Flight Data heads-up display

The Log window shows the X8's recent flights. Select the flight for your mission,
and select Download These Logs. This will save the log file to your computer in the
location displayed under the list of flights.

Mission Planner: Download Logs

Program Files: Retrieve log file

To retrieve the log file, access your computer's file structure under Program Files/
Mission Planner/logs!DCTOROTOR, and select the .log file for the date of your flight.

32

Check:

Pix4Dmapper

1
Open Pix4D Mapper, and create a new
project.

Proiect

2

3

Select Aerial Nadir as the
project type.

After adding the images, select From File to add the geolocation data from the
XS's log file. In the pop-up window, select 3D Robotics Flight Log as the file
format, and upload the dataflash log file downloaded from Mission Planner.

1111111

----11

~"'!';"..;::::•.~~- ... ,.,...~

··--"""'""'"""'"""':»',. . .""'--J)

.Jl:nlobotics

II

L='

UAV TECHNOlOGY

•=~•il
~I
Accur.o<y

\ortlml

--

n-.
[do'

100011

II

1
1

l

1/Ji))'J

'

, II

iii

Rapid Check: Initial
After creating the project, select the Local Processing screen (Process
menu). Check the option for Initial Processing and Rapid Check. Uncheck
all other local processing options, and select Start.

Processea::

2014-,!.pr-2516:30:49
CanooOO.JS229HS_4.3_.40000D00

9.3cm
0.5979 ~/5!1.7946 ha/0231 SQ. mi.
f.~
P!t.rr.toliP:~

..:. Fu!l'f=l>;j

c;z.i>off.ClWI!De~~fttatio!l

-~ ~Ch!!;k:

-~3 DSMandOr~~'"llllon

\1>!:;:>'~~.... -:~·:c;:-.d!. -~::.:."

Pix4D will generate a Quality Report that will indicate if the images are of
sufficient quality to create a map.

coorooae S}'St.e!lr

WGS84

GrooodCooirofPcintfGCPlcom~~m:

WG$8<

Pfocessingfjpe:

""""""""--

~(scale 1} ae:nat nadir

Time fOI' lmtiat JZroce5Sing (11112JoettepllJft

24m:01s

-__
.,..,.,..

-

WGS84llJTU zone 32M

121 out of 12:1 images caiiOCated (100%), alllmao;:es en.Wted.
O..mli<relati¥etlilf~~iniliatandlinalrocatltflgtt

7 G.CPs (7 30}. 0.1)45 m

Full Processin~
To complete full processing for the map, visit support.pix4d.com for instructions.
33

wwww

CDOJ())Ol

Aeriallma~in~

Concepts

Understanding key concepts in aerial images can help you understand the mission planning process and create better maps.
Distance-Based Imaging
By default, the camera captures only the images required to create the map. The Pixhawk monitors the distance traveled by the aircraft and sends
a command to the camera to capture an image at the distance interval specified by the camera trigger distance parameter (CAM_TRIGG_D/Sl). This
parameter is set by the Mission Planner Survey tool during survey configuration by calculating the minimum distance between images based on the
parameters specified for the survey (altitude, overlap, sidelap). This distance-based imaging allows for more precise data collection, resulting in less
images and data storage cost. Once configured, the Survey tool creates an event at the start of the mission script (after takeoff) to set the camera
trigger distance to the specified interval and an event at the end of the mission (before landing) to reset the camera trigger distance to 0.

Time-Based Imaging
The camera is also equipped to capture images at a consistent time interval instead of using distance. This function can be useful if you want to
capture images over an area without planning a mission. This time-based imaging results in more images per area, and therefore more processing
time and storage cost. See the Trigger Type options on page xx to enable time-based imaging.

Overlap and Sidelap
To capture images for the map, the aircraft flies a lawnmower-like pattern in strips across the survey site. The front-to-back overlap between
sequential images is called overlap; the side overlaps of adjacent pictures in different strips is called sidelap. The overlap and sidelap parameters
in the Survey tool (see Advanced Options page xx) determine the distance between images and the number of images to be captured based on
the projected ground area that each image will cover, called a footprint. Increasing overlap and sidelap improves the accuracy of the map while
increasing flight time and processing time.

.-~~­

Jk~-- ···~~~~130%Sl:CE...AP

In the Survey tool, Distance between Images shows the specified
camera trigger distance that will be assigned to the mission.
You can also see the projected image footprint size and the
total number of images to be captured.

-~·~.,'.

·:P>

,' ,'

.·

.,
·,

.

...::...._ ---.--~~--~·--·----..:.,
50%0VEflL.AP

Default overlap: 50%
Default sidelap: 60%

35

3DREAI
3DR EAI is based on KAP UAV Exposure Control Script v3.1: a great open-source project for kite and
UAV aerial photography.
Start and Stop Script
Ensure the camera is set to P (program) mode before powering the camera. Upon startup, 3DR EAI
starts automatically and listens for commands from the autopilot, indicated by waiting for USB signal.
To stop (and re-start) the script, press the shutter button. The script will display INTERRUPTED when
stopped.

Script start: waiting on USB signal

Script Menu
The script menu allows you to change the parameters associated with the script itself, including
changing the trigger mode and adjusting exposure. To open the script menu, stop the script and
select the FUNC. SET button. These parameters are configured for the 8100 and do not require
adjustment as part of standard operation.

Script menu

Trigger Type
This parameter allows you to control how the camera captures images. Trigger type defaults to USB
for distance-based imaging during mapping missions. For time-based imaging, select Interval and
specify the length in the Shot Interval parameter.

Trigger Type default: USB (mapping)
Variable intervalometer: Interval (default to 2 seconds, specified by Shot lnterva~
Script stopped: INTERRUPTED FINISHED

CHDKMenu
The CHDK menu contains all the standard options provided with CHDK. To access the CHDK menu,
stop the script and select the MENU button.
Script menu: Trigger Type

Memory Reset
If the battery is left out of the camera for too long, the camera will reset its memory. To re-configure
the camera in this case, visit 3DR.com!X8-Mfor instructions.

CHDKmenu

Online Resources and Information
Visit 3DR.com/X8-Mfor links to updates, more information about KAP UAV, and full CHDK instructions.

36

lma~e

Quality Troubleshootin~

If you observe poor image quality during the spot check or if you receive error
messages during processing, use the settings below to troubleshoot the image quality.

Blurry Images
To correct motion blur, adjust the shutter speed using the Target Tv parameter in the script menu.

Target Tv (shutter speed) default:
To correct moderate motion blur:
To correct severe motion blur:

1/1250
Set to 1/1600.
Set to 1/2000.

•..

·

~

•
·~~~'

·'!. . • . .,,_,..·.
--

.~.~

""'

'---.

<

Example image: motion blur

Script menu: Target Tv

Example image: overexposure

Script menu: NO Filter

Overexposure
If the images are overexposed but do not show any motion blur, it can be due to flying in extremely
bright conditions. To correct this, set the Allow use of ND filter parameter to YES in the script menu.

Allow use of ND filter default:

No

To correct overexposure:

Set to Yes.

Processing Errors
If you receive errors from Pix4Dmapper regarding the images, dataset, or matching points, increase
the overlap and sidelap during survey configuration to improve the quality of the image set.

Overlap default:
Sidelap default:
To improve processing:

50%
60%
Set overlap to 60% and sidelap to 70%.

Mission Planner Survey tool Advanced Grid Options: Overlap and Sidelap

37

Operational Troubleshootin~
No Images Captured
1 If the camera did not capture any images during the mission, first perform a
physical inspection on the X8.
Is the mini-USB cable connected to the camera's USB port?

2 Take a distance-triggered test image on the ground by manually setting
the camera trigger distance parameter to 1 m.
Power the aircraft and connect to Mission Planner. Select Config/Tuning and
Full Parameter List. Change the CAM_ TRIGG_DIST parameter to 1 , and select
Write Params. Now carry the X8 for a few meters to see if the autopilot
triggers the camera.

Camera (side)

Are the AUX OUT 6 pins connected on Pixhawk?

--

·-·

~~876543210DDDDD

~

-~·J·····~-~

. . . . . '-

:::: :,:: ~:_:6;

:~:

:_:';

AUX OUT 6: black(-), red(+), white (s)

Pixhawk (side)

Is the camera battery charged? Unlock the SD card to view the Canon's
battery level indicator.
Mission Planner Full Parameter List: Set CAM_TRIGG_DIST to 1.

Camera wiTh SO card unlocked, running Canon sofuoVare

LED Error Indicator
If the status LED displays blinking yellow, the X8 is failing one the pre-arm safety checks. To determine the specific failure, check the
heads-up display on the Mission Planner Flight Data screen. There will be an error message specifying the failed check.

Radio Calibration Failure:
Accelerometer Calibration Failure:
Compass Calibration Failure:
GPS Failure:

Perform Radio Calibration in Mission Planner or RC controller re-binding
Perform Accelerometer Calibration in Mission Planner
Perform Compass Calibration in Mission Planner
Wait for improved GPS signal or move to a more open area

38

! Safety- Read Before Flying !
Your first priority must absolutely be the safety of people!
Multicopters are essentially Flying Lawnmowers!
•
•
•

•
•

•

•

•

•

•

ArduCopter is an experimental aircraft running community-created code- Novel and unexpected results
are NOT uncommon!
Crashes can happen, because of pilot error or hardware or software malfunction.
Especially while you are learning, it is recommended that you avoid, stiff, ultra-sharp carbon fiber props.
o Get cheaper more flexible and more breakable plastic ones.
o Some carbon fiber props cut better than a Ginsu and while they are almost indestructible, you are not.
If you are flying anywhere near other people, you are putting them at risk!
Be sure to maintain safe distances between yourself, and spectators and your copter.
o Circumstances will require that you will need to make your own determination of what is a "safe distance"
from people and property.
o At a minimum, consider: at least 1Oft (3m) but not further than 30ft (1Om) from you.
o Keep all other people, property and obstacles considerably further away from your copter.
o
Ensure that no one gets between you and your copter.
o Spectators should always be a safe distance behind the pilot.
o If people intrude beyond what you have determined to be the "safe" area, land immediately and do not
take off until they are clear.
o At full power, an average sized multi-copter can exceed 20 mph (32 km/h), can ascend to hundreds of feet
and easily travel more than a mile in distance before running out of battery.
Always ensure that the battery cable is (NOT) connected to the power distribution board or harness until
you are ready to fly.
o After landing the first thing you should do is disconnect your battery cable.
o Always remove your props while you are testing motors.
o Your hands, arms and face and those of your friends will thank you.
o When the battery is connected, always assume the motors are armed.
o Check with a short throttle pulse.
o Don't pick up the model and the radio at the same time, you may bump the throttle.
o
Do not attempt to fly longer than your batteries safe capacity.
• At a minimum it is very hard on the battery and at worst you will crash destructively.
The APM and PX4 flight controllers we use incorporate a motor arming safety feature.
o Immediately prior to flight after the battery has been connected, the RC transmitters throttle stick needs to
be held down and to the right for several seconds to arm the motors.
o After landing your first response should be to hold the throttle down and to the left for several seconds to
"Disarm" the motors.
o Disarm condition can be tested by moving the throttle stick up, if the motors do not move it is dis armed.
o
Even when disarmed, the throttle stick should always be kept in the full down position except when flying.
Get used to switching back to Stabilize mode from other modes and reassuming full manual control.
o This is the single most important recovery technique (practice it).
o Stabilize mode can have Simple mode added to it, but if you do, practice with it till you are proficient.
o
Do not use any modes other than Stabilize or Stabilize plus Simple until you are VERY comfortable flying.
Important primary response to a crash, inadequate landing or unknown flight controller state.
o The first thing to do is throw a towel over your copters propellers (Propellers may start spinning
unexpectedly).
o Then immediately disconnect the battery.
o A large towel is your most important piece of safety equipment followed by a fire extinguisher and a first
aid kit. --Generally better to use the first one than the last one.
When testing or flying any of the navigation modes (using GPS):
o Ensure that your GPS has "Lock" before arming and takeoff.
o Check that your home position on the Mission Planner is in fact correct.
o Sometimes GPS's do not report the home position accurately, reboot if not accurate and wait for 8 or more
satellites (not just 3D lock) and check again.

l

I

Keep a safe distance between your Copter and People!
These tips can also help protect your multicopter from damage.
•

•

•
•

•
•

•

•

•

•

Avoid sudden or extreme transmitter control stick deflections
o Move the control sticks in small measured increments and don't "yank" on them.
o If the copter is properly calibrated and balanced it should require only small stick inputs to control altitude,
direction and speed.
o Your copter should be more or less stable on the horizontal plane without any control inputs.
o If you are "fighting" the copter, land and fix it- something is not right- Hardware adjustment or software
calibration may be required.
o Be especially careful of large throttle inputs, as a copter can gain (or lose) altitude very rapidly.
Because MultiCopters are symmetrical it is especially easy to lose Visual Orientation.
o For manual flight modes, maintaining a clear vision of the Copters Orientation (direction it is facing) is the
most critical part of successful flight.
o Especially while learning it is very important to keep your copter appropriately close to you to aid in
maintaining visual orientation.
o Generally: more than 1Oft (3m) but not further than 30ft (1Om) from you.
o If the copter gets further than about 1OOft (30m) it starts getting difficult to be able to
maintain orientation and can easily crash.
o If you lose Yaw orientation while flying in Stabilize mode, try only flying forward and using yaw to steer like
a car.
o It is much better to simply descend and land rather than have an orientation-induced crash or fly away.
• Fly-Aways often happen when the copter is commanded to tilt back towards the pilot but has
rotated in the meantime and is so far away that orientation is lost.
•
Result: the copter flies further away and crashes or is lost.
Always have Stabilize mode as the {Go To) one of your 3 options.
High or unexpected winds or gusts can make flight considerably more difficult.
o High winds can prevent forward progress or spin the copter around causing you to become disoriented.
o The higher you are, the more likely high winds will be a problem.
o Switching to Stabilize mode and landing before you reach your skill limits can help you save your copter.
Avoid flying at high speed or high altitude until you have gained considerable confidence in both manual
and automatic modes.
When flying around trees or buildings it is very easy to lose visual orientation or even to lose sight of the
copter completely.
o Gusting winds around objects can also worsen the problem and radio signal loss can also occur.
o If your copter is approaching a potentially interfering object, immediately switch to stabilize mode and land
or retrieve the copter to your location.
ArduPilot specific safety modes: RTL, FailSafe and GeoFence.
o RTL can provide a safe Return to Launch if it starts to get away from you.
o FailSafe and GeoFence can assist you with keeping the copter in a safe proximity.
o Do not rely on the above safety modes, always be ready to take control in stabilize and land the copter.
o Especially do not rely on the above safety modes to perform maneuvers or training that you would
otherwise consider dangerous.
o These modes are a supplement to, not a replacement for sound safety practices.
On your first takeoff after tuning or hardware setup
o In stabilize mode advance the throttle very slowly until the copter is almost hovering.
o If the copter is trying to flip over turn it off and correct the problem, a motor could be turning the wrong
direction, or a wrong direction prop could be installed.
o If the copter tries to rotate on it's axis or fly off in some direction the transmitter or RC setup may be
incorrect, a motor or ESC may not be performing properly or the props may be installed incorrectly.
o When all problems are fixed it should be fairly easy to get the copter to hover a foot or 2 above the ground.
o If a stable and stationary hover a foot or 2 above the ground cannot be achieved, land and fix the problem
When flying FPV "First Person View" {with a video camera), Set modes to: STABILIZE, SIMPLE, and RTL.
o Ensure RTL is working properly before using FPV,
o Use Stabilize mode to fly FPV and If you lose FPV video switch to Simple or RTL to get back.
Make sure your battery can't fall out, use a Velcro Strap to hold it in place.

3~~

Aero-M
anual
Thank you for purchasing an Aero-M! This manual contains important information about your
aerial mapping platform. Please read these instructions before your first flight.

1 Plan

1

2 Fly

20

3 Process

37

Appendix

41

Parts

2

Flight Battery
Charging
Safety
Powering the Aero

3
3
3
4

Camera Setup
3DR EAI
Charging
Starting a Mission
Mounting

5
5
5
5

Ground Station Setup
Download Software
Connect to Radio

7
7
7

6

Mission Planning
Operating Parameters
Load Maps
Draw Polygon
Configure Survey
Save and Write Mission

8
8
9
10
11
19

Parts

RC controller and
accessories

Aero

/:s

•

batteries (2)

Q

;[f

-

camera

ground station radio

micro-USB cable

charger and
accessories

wing spar
battery guard bag
horizontal stabilizer

·-

wing rubber bands
(4 plus 2 spare)

-·

wings

...--

propellers (1
plus 1 spare)

__j

•~»~"c'l

~

, ..
registration card and
Pix4D license key

propeller wrench

~

spare control horns
(2)

....

spare servo rods (2)

r-.FPVIOSD System
If you selected to receive a FPV/OSD system, those components
will be included with the Aero's accessories. See page 34 for
parts and instructions.

hex keys(?)

Ill
[I

spare camera
mount filters (2)

Pixhawk micro-SO
card adapter

2

Fli~ht

Battery

The Aero is powered by a rechargeable lithium polymer (LiPo) battery.
Charge the battery before your first flight.

Safety
2
Set the charger to LiPo and 3A.

Connect the charger to the power adapter cable
and a wall outlet. Connect the red cable to the +
port and the black cable to the - port.

; r:nrn':

......... ·HHnnt
;;J:tift ::;}I:

n

0

==-

15

0
25

n

3S

A
Flying with a low battery is a safety risk and can render the
battery permanently unusable. Always fly with a fully charged
battery.

r:

4S

Charge the battery using a designated LiPo balance charger
only. Always monitor the battery while charging. Protect the
battery from extreme heat, extreme cold, puncturing, and
flammable surfaces. Always transport, charge, and store the
battery in the guard bag.

0

LiPo

Charger with power cable and
split-wire charging cable

3A

Inspect the battery for damage before and after flying. If you
observe any swelling of the package or the battery ceases
to function, do not use the battery; locate your local battery
recycling center, and dispose of the battery. In the US and
Canada, visit call2recycle.org to find a location. Do not
dispose of the battery in the trash.

Charger settings

4
Secure the battery inside the guard bag,
and charge until the status indicator
displays green.

3
Connect the white connector to the 4S port, and
join the two yellow connectors together.

~!!!!!!!

•

....

Charging

4S

~-

+---

Flight battery charging wiring

Complete

Charging in process

'

3

Powerin~

2
Turn on the controller. To avoid triggering
the controller's startup alarm, ensure that
all switches are set back (away from you)
and the throttle stick is set fully down.

Open the battery compartment by
sliding the knob on the orange switch
forward and lifting out the lid.

It is important to establish communication before
powering on the Aero. Always turn on the controller
before connecting the battery. When powering off
the Aero, disconnect the battery before turning off
the controller.

~~-

L
·
_
k

Switches

A

Aero: battery compartment lid
Throttle stick

RC controller

3
Insert a charged battery into the battery slot,
and attach the yellow connectors. This will
power on the Aero.

""

\..

A

battery

Hold the Aero still and level while it powers on.

connector

Attach the velcro above the battery slot to the
velcro on the battery. Close and secure the lid
onto the battery compartment.
flight battery

Aero: battery compartment interior

4

Camera Setup
The Aero includes a Canon PowerShot S1 00 running the 3DR EAI script.

EAI (Exposure-Aperture-180)
3DR EAI runs on the Canon Hacker Development Kit (CHDK), a powerful opensource tool that expands the functionality of Canon point-and-shoot cameras. 3DR
EAI optimizes image exposure and integrates with the Pixhawk autopilot to enable
distance-based imaging.
This software is designed to load off the camera's SD card, leaving the original Canon
programming intact. The yellow switch on the side of the SD card allows you to lock
or unlock the card. Lock the SO card to run 3DR EAI; unlock the SD card to save
images to your ground station or to boot the camera with its original programming.

Charge the camera battery before your first flight. Once
fully charged, insert the battery into the camera.

f--

status indicator

For more information about 3DR EAI, see page 43.
Canon battery charger

l

a

i
SD card locked
Load 3DR EAI

SD card unlocked
Load default Canon software

»

»

Fly a mapping mission

To prepare the camera to fly a mapping mission, ensure that the mode
dial is set to P (program) mode. Power on the camera using the silver
button on the top. 3DR EAI will start automatically, and you will see the
script messages on the camera display. Check to see that the last line
of the script reads waiting on USB signal. The camera is now ready to map!

View images on camera

>> Save images to ground station
>> Update script
power button
...... 1\it!m".J:II"t•••'

mode dial

D:f.RfUICIPJrtSX2!i8-,L.rts~f

~On.m>_3.l

i'i15s_th!\shirt.b.Y;b,:t1.Dn.'toptr.llil!_,

·au: 1,3;11-:513.~--1.810 IU:J--~-21114

-~:Pil!Y.Cootlr&JW5"JF:8,Stna.Jf'-:B

-=tn296

Ty:_U.138
•ltt:l/64JIE.'tlllllp:!.8
RII:<I:;B•Idt>:3.511111Br:8;1.

IS&In:!lll$01:411ISlJ2:15lll
tF~:3Yldea:B.US8:2

fMS:1Jr:t:2Sl&:8Diy:&..BJt:1.

vq.IUnr-DD_.USEI~1!1ll'l

.

""
Camera running 3DR EAI

A

Camera running Canon software

Power off the camera before removing the SO card.
Camera ready to map: maftf.'¥J on USB signal

5

The camera mounts to the Aero inside the battery compartment
and connects to the autopilot using the mini-USB cable. When the
camera is ready to start the mission, insert the camera into the
mount inside the battery compartment as shown below, connect
the mini-USB cable to the camera, and secure the camera in place
using the velcro strap.

The camera mount includes a lens cap that protects the filter during
travel. Make sure to remove this lens cap before you fly, and check
that the filter contains no foam particles, dirt, or scratches that could
affect image quality.
It is expected that the filter will accumulate scratches after significant
use. If you notice any damage to the filter that could affect image
quality, unscrew the filter and replace with one of the extra filters
provided with the Aero.

autopilot integration cable

UVfllter

Camera mount (bottom): cap removed
Aero battery compartment: camera mount

l!!!l

Connect mini-USB cable inside
battery compartment here.

Camera mount (bottom): cap attached

Camera (side)

The camera mount is fixed to the inside of the battery compartment
and is not intended to be removed from the Aero.

6

Ground Station Setup
Mission Planner allows you to turn a Windows laptop into a full-featured
ground station for configuring and monitoring autonomous missions. You will
need to take this laptop into the field when you fly the mission. As part of the
mission procedure, you will use the Pix4D Rapid Check to verify the quality of
the image set before leaving the field.

Load

II

Mission Planner

Mission Planner is a full-featured ground station application for planning
missions and monitoring the Aero in flight. Download Mission Planner
from 3DR.comldownload_sottware.

Connect

Radio

To connect the Aero to Mission Planner, connect the ground station radio
to the laptop, and power the Aero.

2
Connect the ground station radio to your
laptop using the micro-USB cable. Open
Mission Planner.

Select 57600 and AUTO, then select CONNECT.
(When connecting directly to Pixhawk's
micro-USB port, set the rate to 115200.)

If you already have Mission Planner installed, make sure you're running
the most recent version: Select the Help tab and Check tor Updates.

Mission Planner Connect tool (top-right corner))

Ground station laptop with radio connected

3
Mission Planner: Help tab

Select Flight Data to view live data from the Aero.

Pix4Dmapper LT 3DR Edition

Your license key for Pix4Dmapper can be found on the registration card
inside the documents package.
Visit mapper.pix4d.com//icense-redeem to create an account and redeem
your license key; then visit pix4d.com/downloadto download Pix4Dmapper
Discovery. Pix4D will automatically upgrade from the Discovery edition to
the LT 3DR Edition (or Pro Edition if you selected to upgrade) when you
log in to the program with your Pix4D account information.

Mission Planner Flight Data tab: connected to aircraft

7

Mission Plannin~

Para
The Aero is a complete solution for creating
high-resolution visual-spectrum aerial maps.

Canon 8100
Pixhawk
autopilot
system

f-----.

[ 3DR EAI)

f----+

Pix4Dmapper
LT 3DR Edition

Operating Parameters

Camera

Canon S100

Camera Orientation

Portrait (side facing forward)

Operating Altitude

80-120 m

Standard Operating Altitude

100m

Low-Wind Conditions

0-6 m/s

High-Wind Conditions

7-10 m/s

Maximum Wind Conditions

10 m/s

Operating Speed

8-20 m/s

Default Speed

15 m/s

Estimated Maximum Flight Time

40min

Estimated Ground Resolution

5 em/pixel

Estimated Maximum Survey Area

1 km 2

Minimum Photo Interval

2 seconds

Mapping system diagram

To create a map, the Aero flies an autonomous mission over
the survey site, using the integration between the Pixhawk
autopilot and custom-programmed camera to capture images
at a consistent distance interval. Pix4Dmapper then stitches
these images together into a georeferenced, orthorectified
mosaic.
The accuracy of the map depends on the configuration of the
mission. Planning a mission that captures high-quality images
requires balancing the Aero's operating parameters with the
environmental factors at the survey site.

8

Mission Planner allows you to plan the mission away from the mapping location;
however, it is important to assess the environmental conditions on site at the time
of the mission and adjust the flight plan if necessary. Alternatively, you can plan
the entire mission at the mapping location. To create or alter the mission, Mission
Planner requires an Internet connection to access the maps. If you're unable to
access the Internet on site, follow the instructions below to pre-fetch the maps
within Mission Planner while you have Internet access.

2
Open Mission Planner, select Flight Plan, and
zoom to your flying location.

.•

Right-click on the map, select Map Tool and
Prefetch, and accept the default prompts.
Mission Planner will download the maps
for the selected location to your computer.

FUGHTPLAN
)

Mission Planner Flight Plan tab: zoom to mapping location

Mission Planner Flight Plan tab: Select Pretetch

3
Mission Planner will attempt to load the map data from the current level of zoom down to the
closest level of zoom available. However, it can take hours to pre-fetch every level of zoom,
and it is unlikely that the closer levels will be useful in planning the mission. To shortcut this
process, check the slider on the right side of the map. The levels of zoom are represented by
this slider from 0 {bottom) to 25 {top). Press the ESC key to skip levels of zoom at a greater
detail than you need for mission planning.

9

To begin planning the mapping mission, select the area you want to map using
the Polygon tool. You'll be able to adjust the size and shape of the polygon later in
the mission configuration process.

Select Flight Plan, and zoom to your
mapping location.

2

3

Right click on the map. Select Draw Polygon and
Add Polygon Point. Click and drag to add points
around the area you want to map.

Right click on the polygon. Select Auto WPand
Survey (Grid} to open the Survey Tool.

..•

FliGHT Ptl\N·

'

Mission Planner Fligf1t Plan tab: zoom to mapping location

Mission Planner Flight Plan tab: open Survey tool
Mission Planner Right Plan tab: draw polygon

A.

Units
The Survey Tool uses metric units. If your Mission Planner is
set to imperial units, please change the settings to use metric
to plan the mission. Support for imperial units in Mission
Planner is coming soon; check 3DR.com!Aero·Mfor updates.

10

The Survey tool allows you to configure a mapping mission according to the
Aero's operating parameters and the current environmental conditions at the
mapping location. First, set the default values for the Aero.

~

l
==iL

Set Camera
Canon S100-S120

Set Camera Orientation
Uncheck the option for Camera top

facing forward.

Set Default Speed
15 m/s

Apply Survey Speed
Check the option for Use speed for this mission.
If unchecked, the mission will use the Aero's
default speed of 15 m/s regardless of the
speed selected in the Survey Tool.

Mission Planner Sunre;.•tool

11

Next configure the angle of the flight path for the current wind conditions.

~

Set Angle
Wind Direction
In environments with winds of less than 6 m/s, set the angle so that
the Aero flies into the wind. In winds from 7-10 m/s, configure the
flight path to travel perpendicular to the wind so the Aero flies crosswind.
No. of Strips
Adjust the angle so that the Aero makes as few turns as possible to
complete its course. The No. of Strips parameter shows how many
passes the plane will make as you adjust the angle.

Mission Planner Survey tool

Review Wind Conditions On-Site
Always assess the wind conditions at your survey site at the time of
the mission and adjust the mission accordingly.

Configure the fiight path parallel with
the wind in low winds (1-6 m/s).
Mission Planner Tip: Adjust Polygon
Click and drag the red polygon points to adjust the size
and shape of the polygon from the Survey Tool.

Configure the fiight path perpendicular to the
wind in high winds (7 -1 0 m/s).

A

Use caution when flying in winds over 1Om/s. Mapping results
may degrade as a result of inability to make headway or maintain
appropriate groundspeed.

12

The suNey altitude determines the duration of the mission and the ground
resolution of the final map. Adjust altitude to balance flight time and power
consumption with the current environmental conditions.

Set Altitude
Standard operating altitude: 100 m
Operating altitude range: 80-120 m
Increasing altitude decreases flight time, allowing you to cover more area
per minute. Decreasing altitude improves ground resolution. Set the altitude to get the best ground resolution while keeping the flight time under
40 min and the altitude under 120 m.

A
Keep altitude below 120 m, and ensure that the altitude is appropriate for
your flying area and local regulations.

Mission Planner SUJveytool

Check Ground Resolution
Ground Resolution is the centimeters per pixel that you will have
in the map and corresponds to the amount of detail that you
will see.

Check Flight Time
Flight Time estimates the duration of the mission. The total estimated flight
time must be under 40 min for a fully charged Aero battery. To decrease
flight time, increase altitude or speed.

To improve ground resolution by decreasing the number of
centimeters per pixel, decrease altitude.

High winds, humidity, high altitude, and extreme heat can affect power
consumption and reduce flight time. Consider the environmental factors at
your site when configuring flight time.

13

With the basic parameters in place, verify that the photo interval calculated from
the altitude and speed complies with the operating parameters for the camera.

Mission Planner Survey tool

Check Photo Interval
Photo Every must be longer than 2 seconds for the S 100 camera.

Altitude
Increasing altitude increases photo interval.

A
Keep altitude below 120 m, and ensure that the altitude is
appropriate for your flying area and local regulations.

Speed
Decreasing speed increases photo interval.

A
Ensure that the Use speed tor this mission option is checked.

14

Now select a takeoff and landing pattern, either manual or automatic.

~

Takeoff and Land WP's
For automatic takeoff and landing
Check the Add Takeoff and Land WPs option.
Uncheck the Use RTL option.
This will create a takeoff waypoint and a placeholder waypoint for the landing pattern. After accepting the survey, configure the automatic landing pattern by following
the instructions on page 20.

For automatic takeoff and manual landing
Check both the Add Takeoff and Land WPs option and the Use RTL options.
Mission Planner Survey tool

This will create a takeoff waypoint so the Aero will automatically climb to the survey
altitude before heading to the first waypoint. The Aero will return to circle over the
launch point after completing the mission.

For manual takeoff and landing
Uncheck the Add Takeoff and Land WPs option
Check the Use RTL option.
For this option, take off manually then initiate the mission in flight. The Aero will
return to circle over the launch point after completing the mission.

15

The Survey tool includes the following advanced configuration options. These options
allow you to customize the mission to comply with best operating practices.

~

I:

Check Advanced Options
to view the Survey Tool's advanced configuration options.
Select Grid Options

. - ~ Set OverShoot
The Aero has a minimum turning radius of 90 degrees. To accommodate the
sharp angles of the survey mission, set both OverShoot parameters to 50 to
have the Aero overshoot the waypoints on either side of the polygon by 50%
to ensure that the complete area of the polygon is covered by the images.

...___!

A
OverShoot will affect flight time. Ensure that the total estimated flight time is
less than the Aero's maximum flight time of 40 minutes.

Mission Planner Survey tool: advanced options

~Camera Config

...___!

The options under the Camera
Config tab allow you to configure
a camera other than the S1 00
and won't be used for operating
the Aero.

Adjust StartFrom
During the mission, you will maintain contact with the aircraft through the RC
controller and ground station signals. If your mission is likely to experience a
loss of signal, it is best practice to start from the corner of the mission farthest
from the launch point. In this example, Topleft is the corner of the mission
farthest from the launch point.

~

Mission Planner Suroeytool: advanced options

Adjust Overlap and Sidelap
Overlap and sidelap are set to 50% and 60%, respectively, by default. See
page 42 for an in-depth discussion of these parameters.

16

Before accepting the survey, verify that the mission complies with the
Aero's operating parameters.
Operating Parameters
Camera
Canon 8100-8120
Altitude
80-120 m
Camera top facing forward
unchecked
Flying speed

9-15 m/s
Use speed for this mission
checked (optional if speed set to default speed of 15 m/s)
Photo Every
greater than 2 s
Flight time
under 40 min depending on environmental conditions
Mission Planner Survey tool

Accept
Select Accept to create this mission. After accepting, you
will need to reconfigure the survey completely to make any
adjustments.
If Mission Planner prompts you for a home altitude, enter
the altitude that you specified in the Survey tool.

A

Do not accept the mission if any of the parameters
exceed the Aero's operating limits.

17

If you selected automatic landing in the Survey Tool by checking the Add Takeoff and Land WPs option and unchecking
the Use RTL option, you will need to configure the landing waypoint pattern manually at this step in the mission planning
process.

Locate the Takeoff waypoint in the mission script and set the
first option in the row to assign the takeoff angle.
Set the takeoff angle to 20-25 degrees depending on the
length of your takeoff area.

To begin, determine the direction of the wind and select an unobstructed area 200-500 m in length leading to the
launch point, into the wind. On the main Flight Plan screen, create a series of waypoints along this path to decrease
altitude gradually from the survey altitude to 0, ensuring that:
» Turns along the flight path are greater than 90 degrees.
» The altitude decreases by a maximum of 20 m between waypoints
» There is at least 20 m between each waypoint
» The Grad % does not exceed 20%
To add a waypoint, right click on the map in the location of the waypoint you would like to add, and select Insert WP. For
each waypoint you add to the mission, Mission Planner will prompt you for the new waypoint's place in the script: Add
the series of landing waypoints immediately before the LAND waypoint in the script of events. For the first waypoint in
the pattern, add it to the mission immediately following the DO_SET_CAM_TRIGG_DISTwaypoint at the end of the mission.
Specify the altitude of each waypoint and check the distance and gradient angle in the waypoints table.

Mission Planner Tip: Configure Waypoints
Measure the distance between waypoints by right-clicking at one
end and selecting Measure Distance; then right -click on the other end
and select Measure Distance again. A dialog box will open with the
distance between the two points.

fj-----+

Set altitude.

~ Check Grad%.

Double-click on a field in the waypoint table to edit the parameters
for a waypoint.
Use the Up and Down arrow icons to re-order the waypoints.

Mission Planner Right Plan tab: Correctly configured automatic landing pattern

To add a waypoint, right click on the map in the location of the waypoint
you would like to add, and select Insert WP. For each waypoint you add to
the mission, Mission Planner will prompt you for the new waypoint's place
in the script: Add the series of landing waypoints immediately before the
LAND waypoint in the script of events. For the first waypoint in the pattern,
add it to the mission immediately following the DO_SET_CAM_TRIGG_DIST
waypoint at the end of the mission. Specify the altitude of each waypoint
and check the distance and gradient angle in the waypoints table.

Use the Delete option to remove a waypoint from the mission.

18

Save and
For the Aero to run the mission, write the waypoint file to the autopilot.
Don't forget to save the waypoint file to your ground station for future use.

Select Save WP File
to save the mission file to your computer. To
repeat this mapping mission, load the saved
WP file from your computer.

Select Write WPs
to save the mission to the Aero.
Mission Planner Flight Plan tab: Save and write mission

19

Safety

21

Aircraft Operation
Components
Assembly
Controls
Modes
Arming and Disarming
LED Indicators and Tones
GPS Lock
Preflight Checks
Manual and Automatic Takeoff
Manual and Automatic Landing
FPV System Operation

22
23
26
27
28
28
28
29
32
33
34

Flying Mapping Missions
Takeoff Checklist
Initiating
Monitoring
Failsafes

35
35
35
35
36

22

20

Safety
To ensure safe and successful flying, familiarize yourself with the safety information
on this page. Always fly in accordance with your location regulations and these best
operating practices.

Before you fly, determine the boundaries of your safe flying area. If the Aero moves
outside the designated area or exhibits instability in flight, switch to fly-by-wire mode
and land the plane manually. Always be ready to regain manual control of the plane
in the event of an unsafe situation.

Propeller

~
••••

The Aero will not avoid obstacles on its own, including during missions. As the
operator, it's your job to recognize and avoid obstructions while flying. When
planning missions, ensure that the selected altitude is appropriate for all
geographical features of the area, including terrain.

Spinning propellers can cause serious injury. The safety
button indicates the status of the motor to help you
prevent hazardous contact with the Aero's high-speed
propeller.
When the Aero is powered on, the safety
button will blink red, indicating that the motor
is inactive and the propeller is safe to handle.
When you're ready to fly, press and hold the safety
button until it shows solid red. This indicates that
the motor is armed and the propeller will spin if the
throttle stick is raised. To make the propeller safe
to handle again, press and hold the safety
button until it blinks red.

Location

f,/

0
0

;II"

visual line
of sight

Always fly below 400 ft (120 m) and within your visual
line of sight. Don't let the Aero get too far away from
you; make sure you can always see its orientation.
Don't fly in low light, rain, or other conditions that
might impede visibility.

400ft
(120m)

A
0

0

0

0

100ft(30ml

a
•••
{iii} Ill

I ll

You can find more safety tips throughout these instructions
where you see this yellow box.

Always fly at least 5 miles (8 km) away from airports
and other areas where pilots operate manned
aircraft.

Always fly at least 100 feet (30 m) away from
people, vehicles, and buildings. Make the safety
of people and property your first priority!

21

Aircraft Operation
Components
nose

s.'~----------~

rudder

body

elevator

right wing

left wing

motor
Aero tail

tail boom

4~~
tail

airspeed sensor
battery compartment

video system compartment
(above battery compartment)

electronics compartment
(under wings)

left aileron

right aileron

--~~~
Aero (top)

~
ground station radio

controller

If the terms above are unfamiliar to you, visit 3DR.com/Aero-M, and dive into the
exciting world of planes with our Introduction to Flying Fixed-Wing Aircraft.

22

Tail

Turn the plane over and insert the provided tail screw into the horizontal
and vertical stabilizers.

Slide the horizontal stabilizer into the vertical stabilizer along the orange groove.
Make sure not to stress any of the components on the tail.

r---1->>
(i) ..
~ --

Horizontal stabilizer
~--.....-

1
It
\,

__~
,r

__,_J.._.:;_

·,~-i~\11.;;;»

.

I

1
Tail screw

Tail assembly (underside)

"{

.....
Vertical stabilizer

Complete tail assembly

On the top of the horizontal stabilizer, open the blue clasp at the end of the servo rod. Insert the pegs on the clasp into the open
space in the servo horn, and close the clasp. Slide the blue rubber ring over the clasp to secure it in place.

--.clasp

~

.. , ...•

A

"'

servo horn

23

Wings
Attach a wing onto each side of the spar. Do not twist the wing
or the spar so as not to stress the foam.

Locate the two cables inside the electronics compartment marked AILE. Connect these
cables to the two cables on the wings marked AILE. (Either of the wing cables can
connect to either of the plane cables; the order doesn't matter.)

-----~~

...
u--l

----------,,~

,....

~~-..-...,
L
_).,_
~

Place the wings over the body of the Aero with the foam
squares fitted into the matching space in the electronics
compartment. Make sure not to pinch the AILE cables.

Locate the four large rubber bands. Use the bands to
secure the wings to the body of the Aero by the four
orange knobs on the body around the wings.

Repeat on the other short side with the remaining two rubber bands, resulting in two pairs of
opposing right triangles.

Attach two of the bands to the two knobs on one of the
short sides and opposite knobs on the opposing side.

2

-+·

~·-~,·

c-j

_,

~~-'
I

r,. ,;?:
3

4

tit_,

•

[~'~
24

Propeller
Locate the rings inside the propeller package. Remove the ring with
the second-largest internal diameter, and insert it into the back of the
propeller hub.

Remove the nut and the washer from the motor, add the propeller with the writing on the
propeller facing towards the nose of the plane, add the washer and the nut over the propeller,
and tighten the nut.

··~

25

ControLs

yaw left

Fly the Aero manually using the RC controller.

-<r2J

~q~~ :7:"·~~.
',I

~/

\\

'"'+""'

~~

.-{f

~

~t~
- '\~

~

+{[§]]~roll
~->. _/)

[§]]}

···~t/

/~~
.#"'

ji

_ll

"'"'~:·

/;

Turn left.

.............._.,

pitch

throttle

yaw

-~

,,

T\!

yaw right

~

;::""-+~,.

+~
·~\~

,l~

Turn right.

'"'o/il\

-~·

~-±-·

_____,,.,----- 'J

roll left
4~,,

Throttle:

Move the left stick forward and backward to control the motor.

Yaw:

Move the left stick horizontally to turn left and right using the rudder.

Pitch:

Move the right stick up to pitch down and down to pitch up.

Roll:

Move the right stick left and right to control the bank angle.

-~1-

___.;~

~-tP
''':ccf"/

Roll left.

roll right

()(~

~ ---=::t:--

Roll right.

throttle up

~~}

•

roll and pitch center

~I~_ _ j;,_
,_"<

Increase motor speed.

~w-..t
--""'.. :<.._!_.;;......~;~

Decrease motor
speed.

~·-

,,:-4~

\
~-+.J

throttle down
pitch up

••

·-~

-••••••••••

1 [B]

0

J' ~
•·'f~c;.,;\

..;+-

"\:\

,_

7

'
~~--.r'!;7·b...
--

Automatically level.

~~

Pitch up.

'-..·~·~

.

pitch down
throttle fully down

{~~j
'

-~~
.•.:?%,...
~ '-"'"~'-"-'-'-•

•••

Stop motor.

,. _A_ '

"\J¥1/

-*

-- -

~t--·
.

!.,~.~

Pitch down .

26

Modes
Auto - fly a mission
Fly an autonomous mission. This is the mode that the Aero will use to create the map.

To select a flight mode:
First, set the GEAR/MIX switch to select a set of modes. Then use the
FLAP/GYRO switch to 0, 1, or 2 to select a specific mode.

Fly by Wire - assisted manual control
Let the autopilot manage the control surfaces, and navigate based on where you want the Aero
to fly. Fly-by-wire mode* (FBW) is the easiest way to fly and is the recommended mode for new
operators.

With GEAR/MIX set to GEAR,
set FLAP/GYRO to:

0 for Manual
1 for Stabilize
2 for Loiter

*ArduP/ane mode FBWA
With GEAR/MIX set to MIX,
Return to Launch (RTL) - recall to launch point
Command the plane to circle over the launch point. The Aero will return to the position where it
acquired GPS Jock and enter into a circle pattern at an altitude of 100 meters.

set FLAP/GYRO to:

0 for Auto
1 for Fly by wire
2for RTL

Loiter - circle
Activate GPS-positioned circling; the Aero will enter into a circle pattern with a radius of 60 meters
at the current altitude. Move the right stick to adjust the position of the circle.

Stabilize - stabilized manual control
Stabilize mode provides manual control with an added autopilot safeguard: Release the right stick
and the Aero will automatically return to a level flying orientation. Use stabilize mode for the freedom
of manual control with return-to-level stabilization.
GEAR/MIX selects the set of modes.
Manual - full manual control
Fly with fine-tuned manual control without autopilot assistance. Manual mode gives you the most
direct input to the control surfaces, resulting in precise in-flight adjustment. Try manual mode if
you're an experienced RC plane operator.

FLAP/GYRO selects the specific mode, either 0, 1,
or 2.

RC controller (top)

27

Armin~ & Disarmin~
Arming and disarming are important steps that must be completed before
takeoff and after landing to activate and deactivate the motor, respectively.

Before arming, check the status LED. The LED will flash blue while
the Aero acquires GPS; this can take a few minutes. Once you see
the green LED, the autopilot has acquired GPS lock.

• ••

•

Initializing, please wait.

• ••

•

Acquiring GPS lock, please wait.

•

•

Autopilot ready, GPS locked

•

•

LED Indicators

••••
••••

Initializing, please wait
Acquiring GPS, please wait

••••

•

Armed, GPS locked
Loss of RC signal, automatic landing

))J

Low battery, automatic landing

))J

Loss of GPS signal, switch to fly-by-wre
System error, see troubleshooting guide

'-··
Tones
To arm the motor, press and hold the safety button until it
displays solid red.

Visit 3DR.com/Aero-M to listen to Pixhawk's status tones.

To disarm, press and hold the safety button until it displays
blinking red.

~·fP'

~~¢"i""" ••
e0e
e e ee
0

A

""ety billtoc

Inactive, motor disarmed
Active, motor armed

GPS Lock
Auto, RTL, and loiter modes requires GPS lock. When powered, the autopilot will
automatically search for GPS lock. The position of the Aero when the autopilot acquires
GPS will be saved as the home position, and used as the coordinates for the launch
point during RTL. If you plan to use auto, RTL, or loiter modes during your flight, ensure
that the Aero is located at a suitable launch point when powered, and the autopilot
acquires GPS lock before takeoff, indicated by a blinking green status LED.

The arming and disarming procedures ensure that you can safety start and
stop the motor without risk of injury.
The Aero's motor can spin when armed! Do not place your hands in the
way of the propeller while the safety button is active (solid red).

28

Before each flight, perform a physical component check, center of gravity check, and control checks in both manual and stabilize
modes. If any of the components or assemblies in these checks are not secure, tighten the screws or use CA glue (super glue) to
secure the components to the foam.

3
Examine the Aero to ensure that all components are secured in flight configuration.

»

Check that the wings, tail, and tail boom are fully assembled and securely attached.

»

Check that the propeller is secured tightly to the motor.

»

Check that the servo rods are secured to the servo horns with the blue clasps.

With the battery connected and the lid secured, check that the Aero is correctly
balanced for flight. Hold the Aero with one finger on each of the clear, plastic balancing
points shown below. These points indicate the Aero's center of gravity.

I

I
If the plane balances on your fingers, then the center of gravity is correct. If
it won't balance, adjust the position of the battery until you can balance the
plane on two fingers as shown below.

tail servos

wing servos

2
Check that the airspeed sensor is secured to the side of the Aero an.d the
tube is free from obstructions.

--..

~ ..

airspeed sensor

Flying the plane without the camera will affect the center of gravity. If you
choose to fly without the camera, make sure to re-balance the center of
gravity.

)
29

Before flying, power and arm the Aero on the ground and complete these checks to verify that the control surfaces respond correctly to the control inputs. Place
the plane on the ground. and set the mode switches to select manual mode. Move each of the sticks as shown, and check for the corresponding movement of
the motor or control surfaces.

3
Raise the throttle slightly until the motor spins, then
immediately set the throttle back to fully down position.

(@)O

---~~

Roll left
Left aileron tilts up, right
aileron tilts down.

Motor spins.

411~

A

Do not raise the throttle more than just enough to spin the motor while
the plane is on the ground, and do not place your hands in the way of
the propeller while the motor is armed.

0<&~~~~

2

4

Pitch down

Yaw left

0®

Elevator tilts down.

Left aileron tilts down.
right aileron tilts up.

€>0

Rudder tilts left.

Yaw right

Pitch up

Rudder tilts right.
Elevator tilts up.

30

Set the mode switches to stabilize, and hold the plane in front of you. Move the plane as shown, and
check for the stabilization response from the control surfaces.

2
Test: Tilt the plane left.

Test: Tilt the plane down.

Result: Left aileron tilts down, right
aileron tilts up.

Result: Elevator tilts up.

Test: Tilt the plane right.
Test: Tilt the plane up.
Result: Left aileron tilts up, right
aileron tilts down.

Result: Elevator tilts down.

31

Automatic Takeoff

Takeoff

Auto-takeoff works by sensing the movement of the plane and launching it in that
direction. Set the Aero to autonomous mode when you're ready to launch.

If you're new to planes, we recommend having a friend help you launch the
Aero. Have your friend throw the Aero while you control the controller.

Find a launching area with at least 100 feet of clear space in front of you. Face into
the wind, and hold the body of the Aero in one hand under the center of gravity. Be
careful not to place your hand in the way of the propeller!

We recommend setting the Aero to fly-by-wire mode for takeoff. Find a
launching area with at least 100 feet of clear space in front of you. Face
into the wind, and hold the Aero at the center of gravity. Raise the throttle
to center position to start the motor. Be careful not to place your hand in
the way of the propeller!

Hold the Aero above your head, run, and throw the plane at an upwards angle. The
Aero will sense the throw, power the motor, and climb to the altitude specified by
the takeoff waypoint before starting the survey mission.

DO NOT WIND UP YOUR THROW; if the Aero senses any backwards
momentum it will attempt to launch in that direction. Use only forward
moment\.lm to throw to Aero!

Hold the Aero above your head, run, and throw the plane at an upwards
angle.
Once launched, the Aero will require immediate adjustment with the
controller to navigate away from the ground and up to the desired altitude.
Pitch up (right stick down) and add any other necessary controls based on
wind, speed, and terrain.

Automatic takeoff requires you to configure the takeoff angle during mission planning. See page 18.

32

f"

Automatic Landin~

Manual Landin~

To land automatically at the end of the mission, the Aero requires the
mission to be configured with a specific pattern of landing waypoints
that gradually decreases the altitude so that the Aero can land safely.
For instructions on configuring automatic landing, see page 18.

When you're ready to end your flight, follow these steps to land: -

»

Fly a circle pattern above your landing area.

»

Come in on a final approach, flying into the wind at
an altitude of 20 to 40 meters.

»

When the plane reaches an altitude of 10 meters, set the throttle fully down to turn
off the motor and glide down
on a 15 to 20 degree down-pitch angle.

A.
»

After stopping the motor at an altitude of 10 m, keep your thumb on the throttle
stick in fully down position to ensure
that the motor does not accidentally spin during landing.

When the plane is one meter above the ground, pitch up (flare) to land the Aero on
the body of the plane instead of the nose.

wind direction

33

FPV System Operation
If you selected to receive an optional FPV/OSD system, the components are pre-installed
into the Aero to transmit on-board video.

2 Wire and power receiver

Parts
Transmitter
AV receiver

Battery connector

Camera

Attach an antenna to the receiver. Connect the AV output cable to either receiver AV OUT
port. Connect the RC power cable to the receiver DC IN port, and attach a battery to the red
connector.

Antenna

Receiver cables

Batteries (2)

3 Prepare on-board components

1 Charge battery
Charge both batteries before your first flight. Set the charger to LiPo and 1A Connect the
white battery connector to the 38 port, and connect the XT60-JST charger adapter to the
red battery connector and yellow
charger connector.

Connect a fully charged battery to the transmitter inside the compartment in the nose of the
plane. Remove the lens cap from the camera.

~~1----- Remove lens cap!

LiPo

1A
4 Viewing video
When using a 3DR Black Pearl Monitor to view your video, set the mode to DIV (M button
changes modes), the channel to 8 (+ and - buttons); and the band to E (press the power
button to access the menu).

For more information about configuring the FPV/OSD system, visit 3DR.com/Aero-M.

34

Flyin~ Mappin~

Missions

Takeoff Checklist

lnitiatin~

Before flying the mission, check the following:

For automatic takeoff, set the Aero to auto mode and launch according to the
instructions in the Automatic Takeoff section of these instructions (page 33).

"

Camera is on with mission script ready and is secured into the
mount with the mini-USB cable connected and the cap removed.

"

Aero is powered and connected to the ground station with all pre-flight
checks passed.

»

The survey mission has been adjusted to account for present
environmental conditions and saved to the Aero.

For manual takeoff, set the Aero to auto mode after takeoff to initiate the mission
in flight.

Monitorin~
Monitor the Aero closely during the mission using your line of sight and the
Mission Planner Flight Data screen.

Actions

Status

Mission Planner Flight Data: Attitude

2
2

2

3
4
5
6

4
Heading direction
Bankangle
Altitude (black) and rate of climb (blue bar)
Ground speed

*Failsafe behavior enabled

1 Change waypoints or restart a mission
2 Change modes
3 Change altitude
Flight Map

3

1
2
3
4

3

Ground station signal
2 GPStime
3 Currently
enabled mode

1
2
3
4

4 Distance to current waypoint >
current waypoint number
5 GPS status
6 Battery status*
Full battery: 16.8 V
Low battery failsafe: 13.8 V

&

End your flight at 14 V!

5

6
1 Current heading
2 Direct path to current waypoint
3 GPS-reported direction of travel

4 Actual iiighi path
5 Latitude, longitude
6 Altitude

35

I"-

FaiLsafes
The Aero is programmed with a set of failsafe behaviors to prevent a crash in the event of a loss
of one of the data or communication channels required for autonomous flight. Although certain
failsafe have assigned LED indicators and tones, it is unlikely that you will be able to see these at a
distance. Monitor the Flight Data screen for failsafe indications. If a failsafe is triggered, the assigned
behavior will activate. To override the failsafe behavior (RTL in most cases), use the controller to
regain manual control.

Regaining Manual Control
To regain manual control during the mission, switch to fly-by-wire mode using the controller. If
you're a confident operator, switch to stabilize mode. If you observe instability in the Aero's flight
behavior or it the aircraft moves outside your designated safe flying area, switch to RTL. Turning off
the controller will automatically trigger an RTL and can be used in an emergency situation as a hard
recall command.

RC Controller Signal Failsafe
Physical obstructions and interference from nearby wireless signals can affect the Aero's connection with the RC controller.

Low Battery Failsafe
Environmental conditions can affect power consumption. Use the Mission Planner Flight Data
display to monitor the voltage of the battery during flight.

If the Aero loses contact with the controller, it will return to the launch point automatically and
enter into a circle pattern above the launch point, indicated by a blinking yellow status LED.

If the battery reaches 13.8 V, the Aero will return automatically to circle above the launch point,
indicated by a blinking yellow status LED and a quick repeating tone.

If the controller failsafe is triggered, wait for the Aero to return to the launch point, then regain
manual control and either land or restart the mission.

,

0000

.......

-~

.;r· .. ·· .:-:.;_-:..

0000~

36

3 Process
On-Site Quality Check
Spot Check
Download Images
Download Log File
Pix4D Rapid Check

Full Processing

38
38
38

39
40

40

37

Download La~ File
Pix4D uses the GPS data from the Aero's log file to georeference the images. To download the Aero's
dataflash log, power the Aero and connect to Mission Planner. The download process will be faster if
you connect the micro-USB cable directly to Pixhawk's micro-USB port instead of connecting using
the ground station radio. (When connecting directly to the Aero, set the rate to 115200.)
On the Flight Plan screen, select the DataFJash Logs tab under the heads-up
display, and select Download DataFJash Log over Mavlink.

Mission Planner: Flight Data heads-up display

Mission Planner: Download Logs

Program Files: Retrieve log file

The Log window shows the Aero's recent flights. Select the flight for your
mission, and select Download These Logs. This will save the log file to your
computer in the location displayed under the list of flights.
To retrieve the log file, access your computer's file structure under Program Ales/Mission Planner/Jogs/
PLANE, and select the .log file for the date of your flight.

39

Pix4Dmapper Rapid Check: Create Proiect
Open Pix4D Mapper, and create a new project.

2

3

Select Aerial Nadir as the project
type.

After adding the images, select From File to add the geolocation data from the Aero's log file. In the
pop-up window, select 3D Robotics Flight Log as the file format, and upload the dataflash log file
downloaded from Mission Planner.

""'"""'"

.JiiRobotics
UAV TECHNOLOGY

~,HelP

6itiiti&jioulj uj,gi-a(/8,

~;!!.:li

Pix4Dmapper Rapid

I· ,_.,. . . __ _..=--. ..... - ..
_:1!' .. _ _ _

-..,

-

___ _,..

,..,..,.-,.,....,..,.=.,..,..t..-""*"'
f-=<

I

£...........-...-4_,.,...._,...,-_,

i:oolo;1o~S-

0

fie~ IJ!H~ciclcsFY:W12

""

-~=<;~=] i

n-'l'»il.lo-.:~""""'19:li;~5rot::ooW>2>1H

.•;.;;..:to.;.o;.:·;;···

~c

~..,c,~__,__,"""_

... !I

~

I

=-JI =---I I

t:c,..,.:.&.o<.,""""""""'

Processing
Quality

After creating the project, select the Local Processing screen (Process menu). Check the
option for Initial Processing and Rapid Check. Uncheck all other local processing options, and
select Start.

SUmmary .ttl~l
1

~role~
Fmcesse<t

C::inMuaname::

~~-~f!lpfi~-~~{~):

9.3an
0.5919kl'l'iZ1~~79:_16tlafO~.sq..mi
WGSll4

f:{iLlrwrn!Pr~

WGS84

i;:02.P'*!t0~.xl~bon

(jF..:II~'.q,~~

Pix4D will generate a Quality Report that will indicate if the images are of sufficient quality to
create a map.

WGSS4; U1lf zone 32fl

Outputeoo«iilal:e SJStem;

Pro<essU1o~

~-<~:_1}.ae~~r

Timef«iniiaf~~~~

24m:G1s

-

median of 31313 ke!P(Iints- per image

1270011 ... 127 ....... """"""'1""""l.al ...............

0.43%-._,.._._• ..., __

1 GCP:s (730}, 0J)45 m:

Full Processing
To complete full processing for the map, visit support.pix4d.com for instructions.

40

Appendix
Aerial Imaging Concepts
3DR EAI
Image Quality Troubleshooting
Operational Troubleshooting

42
43
45
46

41

-~..,.,--,·"

Aerial lma~in~ Concepts
Understanding key concepts in aerial images can help you understand the mission planning process and create better maps.
Distance-Based Imaging
By default, the camera captures only the images required to create the map. The Pixhawk monitors the distance traveled by the aircraft and sends
a command to the camera to capture an image at the distance interval specified by the camera trigger distance parameter (CAM_TRIGG_DIS7). This
parameter is set by the Mission Planner Survey tool during survey configuration by calculating the minimum distance between images based on the
parameters specified for the survey (altitude, overlap, sidelap). This distance-based imaging allows for more precise data collection, resulting in less
images and data storage cost. Once configured, the Survey tool creates an event at the start of the mission script (after takeoft) to set the camera
trigger distance to the specified interval and an event at the end of the mission (before landing) to reset the camera trigger distance to 0.

Time-Based Imaging
The camera is also equipped to capture images at a consistent time interval instead of using distance. This function can be useful if you want to
capture images over an area without planning a mission. This time-based imaging results in more images per area, and therefore more processing
time and storage cost. See the Trigger Type options on page xx to enable time-based imaging.

Overlap and Sidelap
To capture images for the map, the aircraft flies a lawnmower-like pattern in strips across the survey site. The front-to-back overlap between
sequential images is called overlap; the side overlaps of adjacent pictures in different strips is called sidelap. The overlap and sidelap parameters
in the Survey tool (see Advanced Options page xx) determine the distance between images and the number of images to be captured based on
the projected ground area that each image will cover, called a footprint. Increasing overlap and sidelap improves the accuracy of the map while
increasing flight time and processing time.

~~
~·'· ',. "~' .. ·· .· .''.'.
:1':

·.
....

-~--~2:~----··_:,
In the Survey tool, Distance between Images shows the specified
camera trigger distance that will be assigned to the mission.
You can also see the projected image footprint size and the
total number of images to be captured.

L-~---2-:s-----.::"

Default overlap: 50%
Default sidelap: 60%

42

3DREAI
3DR EAI is based on KAP UAV Exposure Control Script v3.1: a great open-source project for kite and
UAV aerial photography.

Start and Stop Script

Script Menu

Ensure the camera is set to P (program) mode before powering the camera. Upon startup, 3DR EAI
starts automatically and listens for commands from the autopilot, indicated by waiting for USB signal.
To stop (and re-start) the script, press the shutter button. The script will display INTERRUPTED when
stopped.

The script menu allows you to change the parameters associated with the script itself, including
changing the trigger mode and adjusting exposure. To open the script menu, stop the script and
select the FUNC. SET button. These parameters are configured for the S 100 and do not require
adjustment as part of standard operation.

Script start: waiting on USB signal

Script menu

Trigger Type
This parameter allows you to control how the camera captures images. Trigger type defaults to USB
for distance-based imaging during mapping missions. For time-based imaging, select Interval and
specify the length in the Shot Interval parameter.

Trigger Type default: USB (mapping)
Variable intervalometer: Interval (default to 2 seconds, specified by Shot lnterva~
Script stopped: INTERRUPTED FINISHED

CHDKMenu
The CHDK menu contains all the standard options provided with CHDK. To access the CHDK menu,
stop the script and select the MENU button.
Script menu: Trigger Type

Memory Reset
If the battery is lett out of the camera for too long, the camera will reset its memory. To re-configure
the camera in this case, visit 3DR.com/Aero-Mfor instructions.

Online Resources and Information
CHDKmenu

Visit 3DR.com/Aero-Mfor links to updates, more information about KAP UAV. and full CHDK
instructions.
43

lma~e

Quality Troubleshootin~

If you observe poor image quality during the spot check or if you receive error
messages during processing, use the settings below to troubleshoot the image quality.

Blurry Images
To correct motion blur, adjust the shutter speed using the Target Tv parameter in the script menu.

Target Tv (shutter speed) default:
To correct moderate motion blur:
To correct severe motion blur:

1/1250
Set to 1/1600.
Set to 1/2000.

Example image: motion blur

Script menu: Target Tv

Example image: overexposure

Script menu: ND Filter

Overexposure
If the images are overexposed but do not show any motion blur, it can be due to flying in extremely
bright conditions. To correct this, set the Allow use of NO filter parameter to YES in the script menu.

Allow use of ND filter default:

No
Set to Yes.

To correct overexposure:

Processing Errors
If you receive errors from Pix4Dmapper regarding the images, dataset, or matching points, increase
the overlap and sidelap during survey configuration to improve the quality of the image set.

Overlap default:
Sidelap default:
To improve processing:

50%
60%
Set overlap to 60% and sidelap to 70%.

Mission Planner Survey tool Advanced Grid Options: Overlap and Sidelap

44

""·-~·

..

-.~

-

---~---,_~-

Operational Troubleshootin~
No Images Captured
1 If the camera did not capture any images during the mission, first perform a
physical inspection on the Aero.
Is the mini-USB cable connected to the camera's USB port?

2 Take a distance-triggered test image on the ground by manually setting
the camera trigger distance parameter to 1 m.
Power the aircraft and connect to Mission Planner. Select Config/Tuning and
Full Parameter List. Change the CAM_ TRIGG_DIST parameter to 1, and select
Write Params. Now carry the Aero for a few meters to see if the autopilot
triggers the camera.

Camera (side)

Are the AUX OUT 6 pins connected on Pixhawk?
_li!:il8765~3.2l~

..... " .... " .." .. '.. . .
.r •
• • • '•
.. : .· ... :. ·. ·0· . ...
._

•

..

•

•

•

~

"

..

•

•

0-

~

-

+

AUX OUT 6: black(-), red (+), white (s)

s_

Pixhawk (side)

Is the camera battery charged? Unlock the SD card to view the Canon's
battery level indicator.
Mission Planner Full Parameter Ust: Set CAM_TRIGG_DIST to 1.

Camera with SD card unlocked, running Canon software

45

Appendix D

X8+ Maintenance
In order to maintain the continued safe operation of the X8+ platform and to maintain it running
at its optimal performance, we will maintain the X8+ aircraft at the following intervals:
If any part of the X8+ or its support equipment show signs of fatigue or damage, it will be
immediately grounded until the component has been properly replaced by PIC per manufacturer
recommendations.
Every flight
-Inspect the batteries for any signs of damage or abnormality as well as operating voltage.
-Inspect motors for any signs of abnormal wear, rough movement, or contact.
-Inspect propellers for any cracks, debris, or abnormalities.
-Inspect main body and arms for any cracks or abnormalities.
-Clean dusty components with compressed air or a soft cloth.
-Perform Safety Check
Every 30 days or 10 hours of flight (whichever comes first)
-Cycle flight batteries
-Perform Safety Check
-Run motors and observe for any wobble, abnormal sound or roughness.
-Inspect motor mounts and fasteners to ensure tight and secure.
-Inspect main body and arms for any cracks or abnormalities.
-Inspect all wires and connectors
-Inspect landing gear for cracks or wear
-Inspect condition and voltage of PIC controller and controller battery

Page 1 of 2

Appendix D

Annually or every 300 hours of flight (whichever comes first)
-Inspect motor mounts
-Replace motors
-Replace propellers
-Replace all flight battery sets
-Replace PIC controller battery
-Inspect and clean all electrical connections
-Check for firmware update
-Recalibrate magnetometer
-Inspect all wires and connectors
-Perform Safety Check
-Inspect landing gear for cracks or wear

Page 2 of2

Appendix D

X8+ Flight Maintenance Procedures

movement or contact
Inspect Propellers for any cracks, debris, or
abnormalities
Inspect main body and arms for any cracks or
abnormalities
Clean dusty components with compressed air or
soft cloth

--------------------

·-

--------------

Appendix D

X8+ 10 hour/30 Day Maintenance Procedures

abnormal sound or ro
ness
Inspect motor mOqnts and fastners to ensure tight
secure

Inspect landing gear for cracks or wear
and voltage IJfJ?tCcontrol
Perform Safety Check

Appendix D

X8+ Annual/300 HOUR Maintenance Procedures

Appendix E

Aero-M Maintenance
In order to maintain the continued safe operation of the Aero-M platform and to maintain it
running at its optimal performance, we will maintain the Aero-M aircraft at the following
intervals:
If any part of the Aero-M or its support equipment show signs of fatigue or damage, it will be
immediately grounded until the component has been properly replaced by PIC per manufacturer
recommendations.
Every flight
-Inspect the batteries for any signs of damage or abnormality as well as operating voltage.
-Inspect motor for any signs of abnormal wear, rough movement, or contact.
-Inspect propeller for any cracks, debris, or abnormalities.
-Inspect fuselage for any cracks or abnormalities.
-Clean dusty components with compressed air or a soft cloth.
-Perform Safety Check
Every 30 days or 10 hours of flight (whichever comes first)
-Cycle flight batteries
-Perform Safety Check
-Run motor and observe for any wobble, abnormal sound or roughness.
-Inspect motor mount and fasteners to ensure tight and secure.
-Inspect fuselage for any cracks or abnormalities.
-Inspect main wing, vertical and horizontal stabilizers for cracks or warps
-Inspect all control linkages and connectors.
-Inspect all surface hinges for cracks or tears
-Replace main wing rubber bands.

Page 1 of2

Appendix E

-Inspect condition and voltage of PIC controller and controller battery
Annually or every 300 hours of flight (whichever comes first)
-Inspect motor mount
-Replace motor
-Replace propeller
-Replace all flight battery sets
-Replace PIC controller battery
-Inspect and clean all electrical connections
-Check for firmware update
-Recalibrate magnetometer
-Inspect all control linkages and connectors
-Replace main wing rubber bands
-Perform Safety Check
-Inspect main wing, vertical, and horizontal stabilizers for cracks or warps
-Inspect all surface hinges for cracks or tears
-Inspect all movable surfaces for wear

Page 2 of 2

Appendix E

Aero-M Flight Maintenance Procedures

Appendix E

Aero-M 10 hour/30 Day Maintenance Procedures

Inspect fuselage for any cracks or abnormalities

Ins

Perform Safety Check

Appendix E

Aero-M Annual/300 HOUR Maintenance Procedures

Replace all flight battery sets
Replace P1C controll~rbattery
Inspect and clean all electrical connections

Perform safety check

)>
'0
'0
('!)

::J

c..

:;c·
'T1

·..~

